About 192 million people in Indonesia are eligible to cast their vote in a general election on 17 April.

For the first time, presidential, parliamentary and regional elections are all taking place simultaneously on one day.

It's a massive democratic undertaking which will determine the future identity of a vast and diverse country.

So here's what you need to know:

What's going to happen on 17 April?
About 245,000 candidates will be running for more than 20,000 national and local legislative seats across a country made up of around 18,000 islands and covering 1.9 million sq km (735,400 sq miles).

The Lowy Institute, an Australian think-tank, calls it "one of the most complicated single-day elections in global history".

Initial results will emerge within hours but it will take a few weeks for the final results to become clear.

Who is running for the presidency?
It's a battle between current President Joko Widodo and Prabowo Subianto, a former military general. They also went face-to-face in the 2014 elections.

Mr Prabowo is closely associated with the traditional political elite. He was previously married to the daughter of former dictator General Suharto, who ruled Indonesia with an iron fist for three decades.

He has been dogged by allegations of complicity in human rights abuses committed under Gen Suharto, though he has maintained his innocence.

After spending many years overseas, he made his political comeback in 2009. In the 2014 presidential election he campaigned on an anti-poverty platform, saying he wanted to reduce unemployment and create new jobs.

Joko Widodo - known universally as Jokowi - comes from humble beginnings but first came to international prominence by becoming governor of Jakarta in 2012.

In the 2014 presidential election he campaigned on a "man of the people" anti-corruption platform, promising to tackle poverty and to stamp out nepotism and intolerance.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Mr Prabowo (L) and Mr Jokowi (R) are due to face off again
Under his leadership the economy has grown steadily, the poverty rate is falling and some key infrastructure projects have been finalised - including a much-needed mass rapid transit network in the capital, Jakarta.

But he has disappointed some supporters by abandoning campaign promises to resolve human rights violations.

He has also been working to attract foreign investment from places like China, but his critics have accused him of not protecting national interests. His opponent has accused him of selling the country to foreigners.

What are the key issues for Indonesians?
Infrastructure, corruption and the economy will all be on voters' minds.

But the central issue this election will Indonesia's national identity and whether it is taking an increasingly Islamic political path.


Media captionCoffee vendor Eha Soleha is one of the many women running for election in Indonesia
Indonesia has no official state religion but more than 80% of its people are Muslim. It is the world's most populous Muslim-majority country.

Conservative religious groups have become increasingly vocal over recent years - rallying over cases like the blasphemy conviction of former Jakarta governor (and Jokowi ally) Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, known as Ahok.

So the main presidential candidates have been working hard to display their Islamic credentials.

Mr Jokowi, a religious moderate, surprised many by picking Ma'ruf Amin as his running mate. He's a powerful cleric who played a key role in the protests that led to Ahok's downfall. That was seen as an attempt to sway more conservative Muslim voters his way, but may have lost him some support among younger, liberal voters.

Mr Prabowo has promised to protect Islamic leaders and increase funding for religious schools, while respecting the constitution. He has earned endorsements from the Prosperous Justice Party, the largest Islamist party in parliament.

He has picked as his running mate a young, savvy, politician called Sandiaga Uno, who also happens to be one of Indonesia's richest men.

Analysts are predicting a significant number of voters will decide not to vote at all this year, feeling disillusioned with Mr Jokowi but unwilling to back the overt Islamist politics of Mr Prabowo.

Who are the key voters?
According to the Elections Commission, around 40% of eligible voters will be aged 17 to 35 - around 80 million people.

And parties have been trying their best to attract the youth vote - sometimes in innovative ways.

Last year Jokowi's party, the PDIP, launched "fashionable" merchandise including T-shirts, hats and jackets.

Mr Prabowo has been building up relationships with vloggers, YouTubers and influencers, according to a report by the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

Supporters of both candidates have also created their own music videos, complete with catchy tunes.

The threat of fake news
Social media is king in Indonesia - it has the fourth-highest number of Facebook users in the world - and the country has been plagued by fake news problems.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Misinformation is rampant on social media in Indonesia
Mafindo, an Indonesian organisation fighting fake news, said political fake news and disinformation shot up by 61% between December 2018 and January 2019.

The group's co-founder told Reuters that a large proportion of the misinformation targets Mr Jokowi, making him out to be a Christian, of Chinese ancestry, or a communist.

These may not sound like dramatic claims - but they're big accusations in Muslim-majority Indonesia, where race and ideology are especially sensitive issues.





JAKARTA -- Indonesia's cabinet has decided to relocate the capital, moving the government out of Jakarta as President Joko Widodo looks to spur economic development in neglected areas of the populous archipelago nation.

The shift will take five to 10 years, said Bambang Brodjonegoro, the national development planning minister, who disclosed the decision to reporters on Monday. Among the options under consideration, he said that a development plan that accounts for 1.5 million residents would cost an estimated 466 trillion rupiah ($33 billion).

Widodo "has decided to relocate the capital from Java," the minister said, referring to Indonesia's crowded main island.

Jakarta's traffic problems keep worsening, Brodjonegoro said. He added that economic losses from traffic congestion in the capital was estimated to reach 56 trillion rupiah in 2013, and might inch closer to 100 trillion rupiah a year from now. The planned construction of new mass rapid transit lines is unlikely to solve the traffic problems.

"Commuting time now takes two to three hours one way, and four to five hours for a round trip," the minister said, "not to mention when traffic is more severe [than usual]."

The administration has yet to pick a destination for the new capital, but one candidate is Palangkaraya, a city 900 km northeast of Jakarta on the island of Borneo.

Widodo, who is known widely by the nickname Jokowi, told the cabinet that the relocation was designed to jump-start the economic engine in the country's more outlying regions. "We must plan a vision for national development," the president said.

Greater Jakarta is home to 30 million residents, over 10% of the population. Investments and other economic development have been concentrated in the area, leading Jakarta to gain the dubious distinction of having the world's worst traffic congestion. A severe housing shortage has emerged as well.

Jakarta also is one of the world's fastest sinking cities, and it is prone to flooding. Many have advocated for moving the seat of government to minimize the impact of natural disasters on state administrative functions.

Widodo is expected to be certified as the winner of the April 17 presidential election. Relocating the capital likely will become a defining policy decision for his second term in office. However, the nation has posted perennial budget shortfalls, which could hinder the infrastructure investment needed for such an expensive move. Brodjonegoro said the government wants to invite as many private sector companies as possible to minimize the use of state budget to finance the relocation.

The idea of moving the capital from Jakarta has been floating around for decades -- Indonesia's first president and founding father Sukarno actually prepared Palangkaraya as the new capital. Widodo's predecessor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, also revived the idea halfway through his 10 years in office.

But this time Widodo has specifically requested the National Development Ministry conduct a feasibility study for the relocation plans. Brodjonegoro on Monday, however, refused to say if Palangkaraya remains on the table, citing worries it would fuel wild speculation on land prices in the area.

He only said it is supposed to be a completely "new city," and that the president wants it to be outside Java -- preferably in eastern Indonesia.

Indonesia would follow other Southeast Asian nations that transferred capitals in whole or in part for economic or national security reasons. Myanmar moved its capital from Yangon to Naypyitaw in 2006. Malaysia shifted certain central government organs from Kuala Lumpur to nearby Putrajaya starting in the mid-1990s.





BOGOR, Indonesia (AFP) - When Indonesian authorities arrested a politician with some 400,000 cash-filled envelopes, it was a stark reminder that a long-time election staple is alive and well in the corruption-riddled country - vote buying.

Bowo Sidik Pangarso was detained last month for alleged embezzlement from a fertiliser firm, but officials also discovered the lawmaker had boxes stuffed with envelopes of low-denomination notes totalling about 8 billion rupiah (S$765,460).

Graft-busters suspect the cash was earmarked for a so-called "Dawn Attack" - a widespread ploy in the South-east Asian archipelago where people receive cash early on voting day in a bid to sway their ballot choice.


About 192 million Indonesians are set to vote next week across the world's third-biggest democracy, electing officials from local legislators to the president.

Indonesia is riddled with corruption at all levels of society and its Parliament is widely viewed as one of its most graft-hit institutions - even two decades after the fall of the Suharto dictatorship, among the most corrupt in history.

With a record 245,000 candidates in the running, the April 17 polls presents a huge challenge for the Corruption Eradication Commission which is already probing dozens of vote-buying cases.

"The (Pangarso) case proved that politics and corruption are still closely linked," said Almas Syafrina, a researcher at Indonesia Corruption Watch.


Related Story
Interactive: Indonesia's presidential rematch
"It's not enough to just give money to 100 people. (Corrupt candidates) need to give money to as many as they can, hoping that they'll vote for them."

'REWARDS FOR ANYTHING'
Sapta Firdaus, a 37-year-old legislator in Sumatra's Bengkulu province, learnt the reality of vote buying when he first ran for office in 2014.

"So many people asked me for money," he told AFP. "They said 'how much are you willing to pay for our support?'" But it wasn't just strangers he met going door to door - some of the politician's own family demanded cash too. "It's become a habit in our society to ask for rewards for anything," he said.

As many as one in three Indonesians was exposed to vote buying in the 2014 election, by some estimates.

Many candidates defend direct handouts as simply "turnout buying" to ensure already-loyal supporters go to the ballot box, according to 2017 research in the Journal of East Asian Studies.

But some admitted to employing freelance brokers to reach "core supporters" of rival candidates whose votes were "simply up for sale" in return for higher payments, it found.

These "market sensitive" candidates determined how much to pay based on their resources, constituency size and also what their rivals offered, the paper added.

Aspiring politicians who are not well known were particularly likely to buy votes, especially if running against celebrity candidates - another election fixture.

"You can either advertise yourself massively or you buy votes," said Syafrina.

"That applies to incumbent legislative candidates too, particularly those who rarely came to their electoral district and interact with constituents." While penalties have become stiffer, many Indonesians don't see election-time handouts, including food staples such as rice, cooking oil and sugar, as a problem.

"People know that once elected, candidates won't visit the area any more so they use this an opportunity to get some benefits," Syafrina said.

'IN EVERY NEIGHBOURHOOD'
Jakarta has vowed to get tough on corruption, but the challenge is immense.

Last month, a key political backer of President Joko Widodo was arrested in a corruption case, while dozens who served jail time for graft are still running for office this month.

Suharto's son, Tommy, is running for a parliamentary seat despite a 2002 conviction for ordering the assassination of the Supreme Court judge who had found him guilty of corruption.

Graft fighters have notched up some victories, however, including the 15-year jail term handed to former parliamentary Speaker Setya Novanto last year for accepting millions of dollars in bribes and kickbacks.

At a recent political rally outside the capital Jakarta, attendees said vote buying was widespread.

"It's happening in every neighbourhood," said 33-year-old Gustia Ningsih. "Some people will accept cash and change their mind, but others won't switch their vote despite getting paid."

Cafe worker Titin Sumarni said she was "too scared" to consider taking a bribe. "I've already made up my mind who I'm voting for anyway," she added. Firdaus, running for re-election in Bengkulu, vowed to keep his campaign clean even as voters ask him how much their vote is worth. "I just tell them that I'm relying on my policies and will prove it once elected," he said.




Are Chinese-Indonesian voters key to Prabowo's election win?
The three million Chinese-Indonesians have long faced discrimination in the country.

by Aisyah Llewellyn 
15 Apr 2019
According to a 2010 census, there are around three million Chinese-Indonesians in the country [Aisyah Llewellyn/Al Jazeera]

Medan, Indonesia - In February, presidential hopeful Prabowo Subianto made his first visit to Medan, the provincial capital of North Sumatra and home to one of Indonesia's largest populations of ethnic Chinese.

Thousands turned out to hear what the former general had to say. While many other Indonesians might be focussed on issues of identity, the ethnic Chinese minority has more pragmatic concerns.

"People are often swayed by religious affiliations or racial ties, but that's less the case with Chinese-Indonesian voters," said Endar Hadi Purwanto, who owns a traditional Chinese tea shop in Medan.

"We're more interested in the goals of the candidates and whether they are really going to work in the best interests of the people."

According to a 2010 census, there are around three million Chinese-Indonesians in the country. Around six percent of them are in North Sumatra. In Medan, these voters make up 10 percent of the population after the Batak and Javanese.

But the ethnic Chinese community has long faced discrimination in the country. 

In the 1960s, anti-communist purges that swept the archipelago as Soeharto wrested power from founding President Sukarno, an estimated 500,000 people died, including thousands of Chinese-Indonesians.

As Soeharto consolidated his position as president, Chinese language schools were banned, as was the celebration of traditional Chinese holidays such as the Lunar New Year. Many ethnic Chinese changed their names to make them sound more Indonesian.

It became a struggle for Chinese to find work in the ranks of the civil service or politics due to racial discrimination. As a result, many became business owners in order to carve out their own livelihoods in Indonesia.

Sitting in his Ho Teh Tiam tea shop, Endar said the experience of the past continues to affect the decisions Indonesia's ethnic Chinese make today.

"We had to create our own opportunities and our own businesses," said Endar. 


Indonesia election: Campaigning ends before Wednesday polling (2:22)
"[So] infrastructure and growth are big issues for Chinese-Indonesians. We're interested in candidates who care about efficiency and make things easier for business owners."

'Anti-Chinese image'
Brilian Moktar is a member of the Regional House of People's Representatives (DPRD) for North Sumatra and one of the few Chinese-Indonesians to have broken into politics in the region.

He agreed that Chinese-Indonesian voters were an important voice in North Sumatra, telling Al Jazeera that "we're one of the largest groups in the province, ahead of say Malay or Minangkabau voters, so our votes certainly count."

But Moktar also explained that courting this community was not a guarantee to success.

"Prabowo's been rejected three times [in previous elections] by the majority of Indonesian voters. And Chinese-Indonesian voters are strongly influenced by facts, not identity politics. We vote based on logic," he said.

For many Chinese-Indonesian voters, Prabowo's strong nationalistic stance is also likely to deter them from voting for him. 

Prabowo was accused of instigating anti-Chinese riots in 1998 when Soeharto was forced from power. They originated in Medan and spread to other parts of the country, leaving more than 1,000 people dead.

Prabowo was discharged from the military in August 1998 but has always denied stirring up racial unrest in the country.

"Prabowo is infamous for his anti-Chinese image," said Ericssen, an independent political analyst who specialises in Indonesian electoral politics.

Ericssen, who is originally from North Sumatra, added that there were other, more pragmatic reasons why Prabowo may want to reach out to this community.

"Unlike in 2014, when his campaign had strong financial power, this year's it has been financially challenging for Prabowo," said Ericssen.

"He launched public fundraising including gala dinners with the Chinese-Indonesian community. Prabowo needs their money and Chinese-Indonesians who are tired of Jokowi's government will see Prabowo as an alternative."

'Money machine'
Yohanes Sulaiman, a political analyst and lecturer at Universitas Jenderal Achmad Yani, agrees.

"As a voting bloc it seems both sides don't care except seeing Chinese-Indonesians as a money machine," said Sulaiman.

"Think about it. If they cared about [minority groups like] Christians and Chinese-Indonesians, there's no way they would have allowed cases like Meiliana's to happen."

Meiliana, a Chinese-Indonesian Buddhist from Tanjung Balai in North Sumatra, was sentenced to 18 months in prison for blasphemy in August 2018.

She was blamed for complaining about the volume of the speakers at her local mosque.

Meiliana's conviction was upheld last week by Indonesia's highest court, but she told Al Jazeera that she rejected the allegations against her.

"Race and religion shouldn't be used to create divisions between us," Meiliana said from prison.

The case inflamed ethnic tensions in North Sumatra after rioters set fire to Buddhist temples in Tanjung Balai, and politicians, including incumbent President Joko Widodo, sought to distance themselves from the case claiming that they could not intervene in the legal process.

In travelling to Medan, Prabowo campaign spokesman, Dahnil Anzar Simanjuntak said the team was recognising the importance of North Sumatra to the political landscape.

Nationally, opinion polls suggest Widodo remains in the lead as election day nears, and many Chinese-Indonesian voters appear unconvinced by Prabowo's attempt to win their votes this time around.

"In the end, the relationship between Prabowo and Chinese-Indonesian voters is not really about their vote. It is about political branding, political impression and political financing," said Ericssen.

SOURCE: AL JAZEERA NEWS



How the (Once) Most Corrupt Country in the World Got Clean(er)
Indonesia created an independent body to investigate and prosecute corrupt politicians. It worked¡ªmostly.

JONAH BLANK
1:00 AM ET
Activists hold a rally supporting the KPK at its headquarters in Jakarta in January 2015.
Activists hold a rally supporting the KPK at its headquarters in Jakarta in January 2015.DARREN WHITESIDE / REUTERS
Share
Tweet
Email
JAKARTA, Indonesia¡ªPolitical corruption is a fact of life in many countries, and it can be fiendishly difficult to control. The worst offenders, almost by definition, are some of the most powerful figures in their community. Many of the police officers, prosecutors, and judges who might hold them in check owe their job to the very same individuals. It¡¯s a thorny problem, even for countries with well-developed public institutions.

Play The Atlantic Crossword

Our mini puzzle gets bigger and more challenging each day. See if you can solve your way through the week.

Play!
So what does an anti-corruption drive look like when virtually everybody¡¯s on the take?

For decades in Indonesia, the corruption was like the humidity: always there. In Transparency International¡¯s initial ranking, in 1995, of nations¡¯ perceived corruption, Indonesia came in dead last. Last year, it clocked in at 89 out of 180: the first time it ever broke into the top half of the chart. Hardly Denmark (which was first)¡ªbut no longer Somalia (last). What lessons can Indonesia teach the rest of us?

When Suharto, the longtime dictator, fell from power in 1998, he left a legacy of corruption that permeated every level of society. He is estimated to have pilfered up to $35 billion during his three decades in power¡ªearning the title of world¡¯s most corrupt leader. His example filtered down from ministers doling out project funds in gilded offices to traffic cops hustling payoffs on dusty street corners. Police seldom investigated even the clearest cases of graft, and prosecutors rarely took even the most winnable cases to court.


MORE STORIES
 
Does Corruption Happen Slowly, or All at Once?
JULIE BECK
 A storm builds over the White House
Washington Is Turning Into Moscow
BEN JUDAH
 Journalists stand outside India's Supreme Court in New Delhi.
India¡¯s Supreme Court Is Teetering on the Edge
ATUL DEV
 A man holds a 
The Swamp Isn¡¯t Easy to Drain
JAY COST

Read: Indonesia¡¯s democracy is becoming more conservative

Then, in 2002, the country established the Corruption Eradication Commission, which goes by the local acronym, KPK. The new body would run parallel to the police and the attorney general¡¯s office, and was entrusted with the power to investigate and prosecute any public official for any type of corruption.

While much of its employees¡¯ work involves poring over dry balance sheets, the KPK has in-your-face swag. It is housed in its own building, painted boldly in the colors of the nation¡¯s flag: red as blood, white as truth. Inside, the vibe is that of a tech start-up, and the organization¡¯s record seems as sterling as that of a Silicon Valley unicorn¡ªa conviction rate of nearly 100 percent, and over 1,000 corrupt public officials sentenced.

The job of bringing ne¡¯er-do-wells to trial falls to people such as Ferdian Nugroho, a soft-spoken prosecutor from a backwater town in Central Java, who got bored trying two-bit hoodlums and longed for a greater challenge. In a bigger pond he was able to catch bigger fish: Several years after joining the KPK, he netted a shark named Fuad Amin Imron, the regent (an office midway between mayor and governor) of a district on the island of Madura, who¡¯d gobbled up more than $42 million.

¡°Cash was stuffed everywhere,¡± Nugroho told me. ¡°Suitcase after suitcase of it. In the cupboard, under the bed.¡± But that was just a fraction of the take. All those sacks of bills added up to $200,000, but further investigation uncovered $28 million tied up in real estate and another $14 million in laundered bank accounts. Fuad Amin was the grandson of one of the most revered Muslim scholars in the nation¡ªhis grandfather was the spiritual mentor of the founder of the world¡¯s largest Islamic organization. ¡°People respected him,¡± Nugroho said. ¡°And also, they feared him.¡±

Throughout Indonesia, Madura has a reputation similar to that of Sicily: The people there are blunt, straightforward¡ªand not averse to settling disputes with violence. One NGO worker who started poking around the regent¡¯s business was shot in 2015. The would-be assassin happened to be from the same political party as the regent, and received a sentence of only six months in prison, according to Nugroho.

For a decade, everyone in Fuad Amin¡¯s district knew what he was up to, and nobody said a word to the central authorities. Only after the regent retired (bestowing his office, naturally, to his son), did someone finally find the courage to phone the KPK hotline. Fuad Amin was sentenced in 2017 to 13 years in prison, and his assets were seized.

Read: The world¡¯s most complicated single-day election is a feat of democracy

Despite the successes, anti-corruption work remains dangerous. On a spring day in 2017, the KPK investigator Novel Baswedan was walking home from a mosque when a thug on a motorbike tossed acid in his face. Baswedan survived, but was blinded in one eye. Outside KPK headquarters, a billboard shows a photo of his maimed face and counts the days, hours, minutes, and seconds that have gone by without his attacker being brought to justice. The ¡°days¡± digits recently blinked to 780. The message is clear: The KPK may not be able to guarantee its staff¡¯s safety, but it won¡¯t let their sacrifices be ignored.



What else can the KPK teach? Nugroho pointed to three factors that make his organization more effective than many others. First, its independence. ¡°Nobody interferes with us,¡± he said. ¡°I have never once been told to back off a case.¡± Second, its extraordinary powers. ¡°We can wiretap any subject we wish, without a judge¡¯s permission,¡± he said proudly. ¡°Even your FBI can¡¯t do that!¡± The rationale for such freedom is that Indonesia¡¯s judiciary is itself notoriously corrupt; judges come under the aegis of KPK prosecution.

The third element is the KPK¡¯s willingness to go after targets across the political spectrum. Indonesia has 10 parties large enough to win seats in the national legislature, and minor ones almost beyond counting. Most of the big ones have come onto the KPK¡¯s radar. The degree of the agency¡¯s nonpartisanship is contested, but even one former elected official I spoke with, who requested anonymity because he is currently serving prison time following a KPK investigation, grudgingly endorsed its reputation for fairness.

For an organization charged with combating corruption in a country where it is widespread, though, the KPK hasn¡¯t always fulfilled that obligation. In 2010, for example, its chairman was sentenced to 18 years in prison for ordering the murder of a business associate who¡¯d been blackmailing him over an extramarital affair with a golf caddy.

Moreover, a 100 percent conviction rate raises a host of questions. Are the trials and investigations truly fair? The former elected official said that his weren¡¯t, that he was set up by Indonesia¡¯s intelligence agency, and that he was convicted after refusing the judge¡¯s demand for a bribe. Does the commission have a perfect record only because it goes after the lowest-hanging fruit? Perhaps it is ignoring juicier targets farther up the tree. Part of Indonesia¡¯s struggle with stemming corruption lies in the fact that Suharto never served a day in prison (he died in 2008). It's hard to justify a crackdown on lower-level bureaucrats while leaving the kingpins untouched.

The KPK¡¯s greatest contribution, though, may be in merely bringing some measure of accountability, however imperfect. During the years that the agency has been operating, Indonesia has climbed annually on Transparency International¡¯s ranking, from the very bottom to the lowest fifth and so on, before finally reaching the midpoint of the index.

Read: Indonesia¡¯s rights struggle: Deciding which candidate is the ¡®lesser evil¡¯

In the United States today, very few high-ranking officials are ever jailed for corruption. The occasional elected representative, out of hundreds serving at any time, may wind up in Club Fed, but only if he is exceptionally venal and exceptionally careless. Anyone higher up the food chain can reasonably expect to receive nothing more than a fine and probation. This is not because American politics are unusually clean¡ªit¡¯s hard to argue that the current U.S. administration has been a paragon of righteousness, and, indeed, the United States ranks only 22nd in Transparency International¡¯s index.



The most vexing challenge is drawing a sharp line between political corruption and politics as usual. In the course of researching this article, I found that two of my personal acquaintances here in Indonesia had been arrested, tried, and sentenced to prison time (which they served) in cases brought by the KPK. I don¡¯t hang out with an atypically corrupt set of degenerates. Or, at least I don¡¯t think I do. But in a society where virtually everybody has paid off somebody for something¡ªa traffic violation, a building permit¡ªwho can tell?

The United States isn¡¯t Indonesia by a long shot. But that should not be grounds for complacency. When political corruption is tolerated, it can quickly become normalized. The KPK, with its warrantless wiretaps and employment of convicted criminals, doesn¡¯t offer a perfect handbook for virtue¡¯s custodians. It does, however, provide vivid evidence of the measures available to help take on dirty politics.

