Thailand faces escalating political risk as divisions flare
Mon, Feb 11, 2019 - 1:23 PM
 
[Image: AK_bkk_1102.jpg]  
Thailand's political divisions are erupting again with just over a month to go to the first general election since a coup almost five years ago.
PHOTO: AFP
[BANGKOK] Thailand's political divisions are erupting again with just over a month to go to the first general election since a coup almost five years ago.

The spotlight is now on the fate of a party linked to exiled former leader Thaksin Shinawatra. The party, Thai Raksa Chart, saw a stunning bid to make Princess Ubolratana Rajakanya its prime ministerial candidate rapidly unravel on Feb 8 when her brother, King Maha Vajiralongkorn, publicly opposed the move.

The Election Commission will meet on Monday as calls grow for the party to be dissolved in a country used to treating top royals as semi-divine and apolitical. Those calls also show Thaksin remains a polarizing figure: While he has repeatedly won millions of rural votes with expanded welfare programmes, he also clashed with certain royalist military leaders who view him as a threat to their hold on power.

Disbanding Thai Raksa Chart could anger Thaksin's supporters, and boost junta leader Prayuth Chan-Ocha's push to stay as prime minister after the election. Mr Prayuth led the coup in 2014 that ousted Yingluck Shinawatra, Thaksin's sister, and is expected to have the support of the military-appointed Senate.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

"It's a scary time ahead," said Punchada Sirivunnabood, assistant professor at Mahidol University's Faculty of Social Science and Humanities near Bangkok. "Recent events prove that the political polarization is still there, and is more deeply rooted in the country than before."

SEE ALSO:  Thailand's opposition forms alliance, claims lower house majority 

ELECTION COMMISSION

Thaksin or his allies have won every election since 2001, only to be unseated by the courts or the military. Street protests, sometimes bloody, accompanied the cycle of unrest.

Activist group the Constitution Protection Association plans to petition the Election Commission about disbanding Thai Raksa Chart for violating rules that prohibit using the monarchy for election campaigning.

A member of the party, in turn, intends to submit a letter to the commission against Mr Prayuth's candidacy because he continues to have powerful executive powers as the current premier.

Mr Prayuth on Friday agreed to be the prime ministerial candidate for a new party seen as supportive of the military government. The events of the past few days may spur more of his supporters to vote, said Titipol Phakdeewanich, a politics lecturer at Ubon Ratchathani University in northeastern Thailand.

"They will feel that they need to do it to keep Thaksin and Yingluck out of the country," Prof Titipol said.

Publicly traded companies controlled or linked to Thaksin were among the biggest decliners on the nation's stock market on Monday. Shares in real estate firm SC Asset Corp fell as much as 7 per cent, while Praram 9 Hospital Pcl slid up to 6.7 per cent. Both firms are controlled by the Shinawatra family.

The spike in political risk looms over an economy that's already feeling the effects of the trade tension between the US and China. It also comes ahead of major events, including the king's coronation in May and summits of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations due in Thailand this year.


------


Thailand unveils Senate featuring military government allies
Tue, May 14, 2019 - 4:46 PM
 
[Image: file759u6hh80dcyi3diolr.jpg]  
King Maha Vajiralongkorn approved the 250 members of the upper chamber in a Royal Gazette statement Tuesday, with parliament due to meet from May 22 onward.
PHOTO: EPA-EFE
[BANGKOK] Thailand unveiled an appointed Senate that will play a key role in selecting the next prime minister and which features scores of current or retired military and police officials.

King Maha Vajiralongkorn approved the 250 members of the upper chamber in a Royal Gazette statement Tuesday, with parliament due to meet from May 22 onward. The Senate will vote jointly with the elected lower house on the next premier following March's disputed general election.

The Senate includes former Cabinet members and lawmakers under the junta, as well as top military brass, such as army chief Apirat Kongsompong. Many analysts expect the upper house to back Prayuth Chan-Ocha, leader of the 2014 coup, to return as premier. His brother Preecha was also appointed to the chamber.

Mr Prayuth is the prime ministerial candidate for Palang Pracharath, a party carved out of the military administration. Official results from March's poll signal the party is on course to put together a governing coalition, though there are concerns it could be fragile and short-lived.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

"The list shows that a pro-military party-led government coalition is more likely," said Paul Chambers, a Thai politics expert at Naresuan University's College of Asean Community Studies.

SEE ALSO:  Maturing Thai mobile market raises risks for telcos 

Critics say the junta-appointed Senate gives the military establishment the ability to stifle the 500 elected members of the lower house and keep a grip on power. Mr Prayuth needs only 126 lower house votes to become premier if he sweeps the upper chamber.

A group of 11 small parties on Monday pledged to back Palang Pracharath and Prayuth, bolstering the pro-military coalition's chances of forming the next administration.

Palang Pracharath has an alliance of 132 seats based on official declarations so far, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Six other parties with more than 100 seats in total have yet to announce their intentions.

An anti-junta coalition led by Pheu Thai - a party linked to exiled former premier Thaksin Shinawatra - has 245 seats, just short of a lower house majority.

Pheu Thai has said it lost the chance to form a majority coalition because of an unconstitutional interpretation of electoral rules, and is threatening legal action.

A Constitutional Court ruling on May 8 backing the Election Commission's contested calculation formula for some parliamentary seats paved the way for the finalisation of election results last week.

Pheu Thai won the most seats - 136 - in the lower house overall, but fell short of a majority. Palang Pracharath was second with 115.

The new government will face the task of boosting a slowing economy amid sliding exports, moderating tourist arrivals and a spreading drought. The Finance Ministry has forecast the slowest growth in three years.

Thai politics has been dominated for more than a decade by a tussle for power pitting the royalist and military elite against Thaksin and his allies, who draw support from the rural poor and prevailed in every election since 2001, only to be unseated from government by the army or the courts.

---------


After disputed election, Thailand expected to keep junta leader as PM
Thu, May 09, 2019 - 3:13 PM
[BANGKOK] Thailand's pro-army Palang Pracharat party was looking for coalition partners on Thursday from a wide field of potential allies as it seeks to keep military junta leader Prayuth Chan-ocha, who led a 2014 coup, in office as Prime Minister.

The party is expected to easily form the next government, since it needs only a few more votes in the elected House of Representatives to choose the prime minister under complicated new electoral rules written by the military regime.

Palang Pracharat is expected to be joined by the Democrat and Bhumjaithai parties as well as 11 other smaller parties that are not affiliated with either the pro-army camp or the Democratic Front of parties opposing the military, said Yuttaporn Issarachai, a political scientist from Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University.

"Prayuth will certainly be Prime Minister" under this scenario, he said. But he added that the government would likely be unstable, with only a slim majority in the House.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

Leaders of the Democratic Front have cried foul and threatened legal action, saying both the electoral system and the Election Commission were biased toward extending the military regime.

SEE ALSO:  Maturing Thai mobile market raises risks for telcos 

Election officials and Palang Pracharat deny the accusation.

The Democratic Front of seven parties is led by the Pheu Thai party loyal to exiled former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who was ousted in a 2006 coup.

Pro-Thaksin parties had won every election since then but each time saw its governments ousted by legal rulings and coups.

In the latest intervention, the military in 2014 toppled a government that had been led by Mr Thaksin's sister.

It still could be weeks before a new government is formed, even though the pro-junta party is in a favourable position.

Palang Pracharat's most obvious potential allies are the pro-establishment Democrat Party and the Bhumjaithai party, which campaigned on marijuana legalisation among other issues.

The Democrats won 52 seats and Bhumjaithai 51, meaning that either could push Palang Pracharat, which won 115 seats, well over the magic number of 126 votes needed in the House to approve the prime minister under the new system.

The Democrats' spokesman, Thana Chiravinij, told Reuters the party would meet next week to decide whether it would join with Palang Pracharat in government or form an "independent opposition".

But he said the Democrats would never join the Democratic Front because it is led by the pro-Thaksin Pheu Thai. Prominent members of the pro-establishment Democrat Party in 2014 led protests against the civilian government led by Mr Thaksin's sister, with some openly calling for military intervention.

Bhumjaithai leader Anutin Charnvirakul was not available for comment but he said on Facebook that the party "is still listening to the people".

'WHITEWASHING EFFORT'

The new post-coup constitution calls for the 250-seat Senate, appointed entirely by the junta, to vote along with the 500-seat elected House of Representatives to choose the prime minister.

Involving the Senate effectively gives pro-army parties a head start of 250 votes to get to the required majority of 376 in the combined House and Senate vote.

By contrast, the Democratic Front has virtually no chance of forming a government thanks to the appointed Senate.

"Thailand isn't returning to democracy," said Titipol Phakdeewanich, dean of the faculty of political science at Ubon Ratchathani University.

"The election was a whitewashing effort for the military to stay in power so that they can tell the international community that they are an elected government," he said.

The Democratic Front also complained it was denied what it had expected to be majority of 255 seats in the House of Representatives when the Election Commission decided to use a new formula in allocating seats.

The new formula gave 11 tiny parties one seat each, with most of them taken from the anti-military Future Forward Party, part of the opposition alliance.

Under the new formula, the Democratic Front won 245 seats in the House - just short of the majority it had hoped would give it leverage to block legislation if Mr Prayuth remained prime minister.

Pheu Thai on Wednesday said it would use every legal channel to fight the Election Commission's formula.


----------

Thailand to crown its newlywed king in elaborate ceremonies
Sat, May 04, 2019 - 7:27 AM
 
[Image: lwx_Vajiralongkorn_040519_29.jpg]  
Thailand's King Maha Vajiralongkorn on Saturday begins intricate Buddhist and Brahmin ceremonies to symbolically transform him into a living god as the South-east Asian nation officially crowns its first monarch in nearly seven decades.
PHOTO: REUTERS
[BANGKOK] Thailand's King Maha Vajiralongkorn on Saturday begins intricate Buddhist and Brahmin ceremonies to symbolically transform him into a living god as the South-east Asian nation officially crowns its first monarch in nearly seven decades.

The king will be joined by new Queen Suthida after a surprise announcement three days before the coronation that the thrice-divorced monarch had married for a fourth time.

At the astrologically auspicious time of 10.09am (11.09am SGT), the king will be dressed in white as he undergoes a royal purification ritual in which consecrated waters will be poured over his head.

King Vajiralongkorn, 66, became constitutional monarch after the death of his revered father, King Bhumibol Adulyadej, in October 2016 after 70 years on the throne.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

His coronation, after a period of mourning for the late king, comes amid the uncertainty of an unresolved election battle between the current military junta chief and a "democratic front" trying to push the army out of politics.

SEE ALSO:  Thai king is now largest shareholder in Siam Cement Group 

Thai kings' coronation rituals are a mixture of Buddhist and Hindu Brahmin traditions dating back centuries. One of the many official titles King Vajiralongkorn will take is Rama X, or the 10th king of the Chakri dynasty founded in 1782.

Saturday's rituals, which will see the king bathed in holy waters and crowned, are about transforming him into a "Devaraja", or a divine embodiment of the gods.

As the waters start pouring, ancient cannons from the 19th century, used specifically for the coronation, will fire 10 volleys each.

The king will then change into a full uniform and take a seat on an eight-sided, carved wooden throne to receive sacred waters on his hands in an anointment ritual.

Selected officials, including military junta chief Prayuth Chan-ocha, the head of the National Legislative Assembly, and the chairman of the Supreme Court, will pour the waters from eight directions, representing the cardinal and ordinal directions on a compass.

The waters used in both rituals were collected from 117 sources last month, blessed by Buddhist monks and Brahmin priests in temples around the country, before they were combined and consecrated.

Before noon, the purified and anointed sovereign will sit under an elaborate nine-tiered umbrella, where he will receive the royal golden plaque containing his name and title, the royal horoscope, and the royal seal, which were made in a three-hour ritual last week.

The king will also receive and wear five articles of the royal regalia from the chief Brahmin.

Once in full regalia, the king will give his first royal command, a short utterance that will highlight the essence of his reign.

The king will proclaim himself the royal patron of Buddhism later in the evening, and perform a private housewarming ritual at the royal residence where he will stay the night, as previous kings have done.

------------


Thai political parties to form democracy 'coalition' against junta
Wed, Mar 27, 2019 - 7:01 AM
[BANGKOK] Thai pro-democracy factions on Tuesday moved to unite and thwart a junta-backed party from forming a government after the first election since a 2014 coup.

The junta appeared to be in pole position to return to power as a civilian administration after preliminary results from Sunday's poll showed its proxy party had secured an unexpected majority of the popular vote.

Around 7.6 million votes went to Phalang Pracharat with 94 per cent of ballots tallied, the Election Commission has said.

That gives it - and its prime ministerial candidate, junta chief Prayut Chan-O-Cha - a strong claim to legitimacy from a poll held under new junta-scripted rules.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

It is more than 400,000 ballots ahead of Pheu Thai, the populist party toppled from power by the 2014 coup and affiliated with self-exiled former premier Thaksin Shinawatra.

SEE ALSO:  Thailand's opposition forms alliance, claims lower house majority 

But Pheu Thai still appeared set to become the largest party in the lower house, on track for 137 constituency seats compared to Phalang Pracharat's 97, according to early figures.

It also was poised to receive a much-needed boost from other parties in the pro-democracy camp intent on creating an alliance.

Future Forward, a youth-oriented force that took over five million votes, said in a statement late Tuesday that it would join "a coalition of parties opposing the prolonging" of junta rule.

Those parties are expected to meet Wednesday to reveal more details.

Under the stewardship of telegenic leader Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit, Future Forward won 30 constituency seats and is expected to collect more when separate party list seats are announced.

Experts predict days - perhaps weeks - of messy negotiations, with both Pheu Thai and Phalang Pracharat claiming the right to form a government.

Another smaller party, Bhumjaithai, the vehicle of a cabal of savvy billionaires whose allegiance shifts with the political winds, is likely to be crucial in swinging a lower house majority towards or against the junta party.

It has proposed Anutin Charnvirakul, 52, for prime minister and trailed promises of boosting rural incomes across the northeast by allowing medicinal cannabis to be grown.

Seen as a rare compromise figure across a political landscape bisected by personal hatreds, he was once a senior official in a Shinawatra party.

FREE AND FAIR? 

Disqualifications of candidates and disputes over poll irregularities are likely to reshape the balance of the 500-seat lower house before May 9, when final results are to be published.

As the horse-trading plays out, questions are also swirling over election irregularities, with millions of invalidated ballots, dodgy oversight of polling and bungling by election authorities that may have wildly skewed initial numbers.

The Election Commission is also releasing the results in a staggered fashion, claiming "human error" when reporters pointed out that a handful of provinces returned more ballots than the voter turnout.

Regional election monitor ANFREL announced on Tuesday in a statement the initial ballot tabulation process was "deeply flawed", which did "further damage to the perceived integrity" and public trust in the results.

"It is very confusing and someone needs to clarify it," said Watcharee Chanpeng, a 41-year-old voter in Bangkok.

The United States said Tuesday that it saw "positive signs" of a return to democracy in the country, but urged a transparent probe of allegedly widespread irregularities.

"The voting along with, we note, robust media coverage of the process and open debate of its merits, those are positive signs for a return to a democratic government that reflects the will of the people," State Department spokesman Robert Palladino told reporters.

Even against a coalition the junta is not finished.

Apart from other parties that have yet to declare their intentions, Phalang Pracharat has the advantage of a 250-member military-appointed upper house or senate that has a say in voting for the next prime minister.

Mr Prayut, a stern army chief who engaged in increasingly bizarre publicity stunts ahead of the polls as part of an image-makeover, told reporters Tuesday he would "put this country on the road to unity and reconciliation to move the country forward".

Thaksin sits at the heart of Thailand's political rupture.

His parties had won all elections since 2001 with votes from the poor, in the process unsettling the Bangkok-centric elite and their royalist army allies who have struck back with coups and court cases.

On Monday he told AFP in Hong Kong he believed the polls were "rigged" and riddled with "irregularities."