Brunei has become the first country in Southeast Asia to fully implement Sharia criminal law on a national level, imposing brutal punishments for adultery and same-sex relations. But the move is just the latest in a growing trend of conservative politicians across the region pandering to hardline Islamist groups to prop up their support.
The tiny nation＊s plan to implement a strict Sharia penal code has been in the works for more than five years, and  finally came into effect on Wednesday .  

Human rights groups have slammed the decision, and celebrities George Clooney and Elton John have joined a movement calling for the boycott of Brunei-owned hotels around the world.  


The move marks a transition to a more conservative form of Islam in the country, introducing brutal punishments for acts such as same-sex relations and extra-marital sex, and could signal the end of a moratorium on the death penalty that has been in place since 1957. 

Defenders of the penal code have pointed out that for such punishments to be enforced, multiple witnesses or a confession are required, therefore making it unlikely that the most violent punishments will be carried out.  

That is unlikely to appease human rights groups. 

※Brunei＊s new penal code is barbaric to the core, imposing archaic punishments for acts that shouldn＊t even be crimes,§ Human Rights Watch＊s deputy Asia director Phil Robertson said in a statement calling for the suspension of the punishments.  

Matthew Woolfe, founder of an independent human rights initiative called the Brunei Project, has also hit out against the sudden implementation.  

※The government＊s decision to implement these laws is indeed a huge step backwards for human rights in the country,§ he told  Southeast Asia Globe  in an email.  

※It was only in 2015 that Brunei signed the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and now, less than four years later, it has rushed into effect a raft of laws that clearly violate the convention by sanctioning some of the most extreme and inhumane acts of torture,§ he said. 

In a public address in Brunei＊s capital Bandar Seri Begawan on Wednesday, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah, who has ruled for 51 years, said he wanted ※to see Islamic teachings in this country grow stronger§.   

His comments did not explain why the full implementation of the Sharia penal code has been brought in so hastily after such a long delay.  

Shinta Eka Puspasari, a news editor and analyst at Concord Consulting Jakarta, told  Southeast Asia Globe  that the decision could be driven by reasons both political and financial. 

※One [reason] is to strengthen Bolkiah＊s Islamic credentials and popularity among his people 每 the decision reportedly was supported particularly by the Muslim Malay group 每 and another [reason] is to increase Brunei＊s attractiveness in the eyes of investors or visitors from other Muslim countries,§ she said. 

This embracing of Muslim conservatism is not confined to Brunei＊s small portion of Borneo. Its neighbours on the island, Indonesia and Malaysia, are experiencing politically inspired religious polarisation, and farther afield in the Philippines, ISIS-affiliated terror groups still lurk on the southern island.  

Puspasari believes there is rising conservatism in the region that she says ※has triggered social division in Muslim-majority regions in Southeast Asia, spurred by global events and local politics.§ 

Public officials and politicians ride on the Muslim conservatism trend to gain popularity 

While it is unlikely to lead to open conflict or wide-scale unrest, she said, an introduction of more Sharia-compliant rules could hinder these countries＊ efforts to achieve the UN＊s Sustainable Development Goals, which include fighting against discrimination based on gender or sexuality.  

She warned that targets such as countering HIV/AIDS, empowering women and running sex education awareness campaigns may be undermined as ※public officials and politicians ride on the [Muslim conservatism] trend to gain popularity.§  

Nowhere is this more pertinent than Indonesia, home to the world＊s largest Muslim population.  
On 17 April Indonesians will go to the polls to vote on what most experts frame as a two-horse race. Incumbent President Joko ※Jokowi§ Widodo will face off against  Prabowo Subianto  每 the ex-son-in-law of the infamous Indonesian dictator Suharto.  

While both candidates have publicly backed Pancasila 每 the country＊s foundational political philosophy that promotes religious adherence, equality and democracy 每 they are attracting very different supporters.  

Generally, the secular Jokowi appeals to the more liberal voters, so much so that his religious credentials have been questioned by more hardline Muslims.  

Many of these same hardliners have committed themselves to Prabowo＊s cause.  

※Prabowo＊s core supporters come from modernist-oriented, theologically conservative Muslim clerics, activists, and organisations,§ stated Alexander Arifianto, a research fellow at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (RSIS), in a political commentary.  

While this tactic may indeed cement a strong foundation of support, it is unlikely to inspire the national unity that is so intrinsic to the Pancasila philosophy. 

Arifanto argues that despite Prabowo running a ※lacklustre§ campaign that lacks major financial backing, he may still come out on top by appealing to this base.  

※[Prabowo is ensuring that] identity politics continue to play an important role during the election campaign, promoting further polarisation and divisions within the Indonesian society.§ 

This game of identity politics is also being played out in the region＊s other majority-Muslim country.  Malaysia＊s political landscape was turned on its head in 2018  when political party United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) lost its long-held grip on power in a stunning election defeat.  
The party governs two states in Malaysia 每 Kelantan and Terengganu 每 where it has established stricter punishments such as caning for breaches of Islamic law. Recently there have been a string of canings, including two women convicted of having sex with each other, which prompted outcry from rights groups.  

In 2017, PAS attempted to push through a bill in parliament that would have seen parts of the Islamic penal code incorporated into Malaysia＊s existing Islamic legal system.  

It never went through, despite thousands taking to the streets in support of it.  

With UMNO now weakened by allegations of widespread corruption and its former leader 每 and ex-prime pinister 每 Najib Razak in court this week on charges relating to  the massive 1MDB scandal , currying favour with far-right conservatives may be a way back to political relevance for the party.  

PAS and UMNO leaders united at a huge protest in Kuala Lumpur at the end of last year in opposition to Malaysia adopting a UN treaty aimed at eliminating all forms of racial discrimination,  known as ICERD .  

Hew Wai Weng, a research fellow at the Institute of Malaysian and International Studies, told  the Diplomat  at the time that the rally was less about ICERD and more a way to flare up support for the PAS-UMNO allegiance, while ※framing the Pakatan Harapan government as anti-Islam and anti-Malay.§ 

No such politics can play out in Brunei, where the Sultan holds absolute rule. However, the country＊s implementation of the Sharia penal code will not go unnoticed in the region. 

The Brunei Project＊s Woolfe is still hopeful that with enough pressure activists can still get the laws repealed or amended, ※or  at the very least, ensure that these violent and abhorrent punishments are never carried out.§  

The group＊s Facebook page went down on Tuesday for what Woolfe described as ※operational reasons§, adding that he was stretched thin with so many media requests. For a few days this week at least, the world＊s attention turned to tiny Brunei.  

Although it is unlikely Brunei＊s move will have any effect on the wider region, Woolfe believes that Southeast Asia＊s conservatives will have been watching closely.  

※I think Sharia law proponents in other parts of the region, particularly in Indonesia and Malaysia, will be encouraged .§ 

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today said Bangladesh and Brunei are continuing to enjoy excellent relationship, which is solidly founded on many commonalities.

※Our two countries continue to enjoy excellent relationship, which is solidly founded on shared values, religion, cultural linkage, and many commonalities,§ she said while speaking at the banquet hosted in her honour by Sultan of Brunei Haji Hassanal Bolkiah at Royal Banquet Hall at Istana Nurul Iman, the official residence of the Sultan of Brunei.

Sheikh Hasina said that it was, indeed, gratifying for her to visit the great country, a true ※Abode of Peace§- where pristine nature and centuries-old tradition embrace modernity.

She recalled memories of her brief visit to Brunei in early 1990s. At that time, her younger sister Sheikh Rehana was residing in Brunei with her family.

The prime minister said that immediately after coming to office in 1996, she had taken an initiative to reopen Bangladesh＊s resident mission in Brunei with a view to forging closer ties between the two countries.

※I am thankful to Your Majesty for opening the resident mission in Dhaka in 1999,§ she added.

Sheikh Hasina said that her government is implementing series of comprehensive initiatives to materialize the cherished dream of ※Sonar Bangla§ of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

※Robust economic performance and growing investments in social sectors kept us well on track to become a middle-income country by 2021 and a developed one by 2041,§ she said.

The prime minister said both countries agreed to work together to promote deeper cooperation between the two countries.

※We＊ve identified a number of areas for collaboration and also witnessed conclusion of seven bilateral instruments in priority areas,§ she added.

Sheikh Hasina said she had the privilege to attend a Business Forum where business communities from both countries had interactions to identify the potential areas of cooperation.

She invited Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah to visit Bangladesh along with Her Majesty Duli Raja Isteri.

Brunei Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah also addressed the banquet and highly appreciated Bangladesh＊s tremendous socioeconomic progress under the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.

The sultan also expressed satisfaction over the existing bilateral relations between Brunei and Bangladesh. He hoped that with the visit of Sheikh Hasina, the relations between the two brotherly countries will reach a new height.

The banquet was followed by a colorful cultural function.

Brunei＊s small underground LGBT community has expressed shock and dismay over Brunei＊s plan to bring in the punishment of death by stoning for adultery and gay sex.

The laws were scheduled to be introduced on Wednesday in the tiny south-east Asian kingdom ruled by the all-powerful Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah.

The new punishments, which also include amputation of hands and feet for thieves, will make Brunei the first country in east or southeast Asia to have a sharia penal code at the national level. Several mostly Middle Eastern countries such as Saudi Arabia also adhere to sharia law.

The penal code was formally published in 2013 but the government said the laws would be enacted over a period of several years, with the most controversial delayed after international outcry.

The laws have caused dismay in Brunei＊s small, underground LGBT community, which until now had lived in a ※pink bubble§, according to an LGBT activist familiar with the country.

In a nation where homosexuality was already outlawed, the delays over the law had created a false sense of security, said Ryan Silverio, an LGBT rights activist from the human rights network SOGIE Caucus, who visited Brunei several years ago.

※At that time there was one LGBT person and she said: ＆Look at how I dress, look at how I act, am I being arrested by the police?＊ And then a few others said, I think we are okay as long as we don＊t rock the boat, have parades and announce our sexuality,§ Silverio said.

※So my impression as an outsider was that they were enjoying a certain sense of comfort, but I perceived it as living in a pink bubble.§

※Now that the law is out there it is a shock for LGBT folks in Brunei,§ said Silverio, ※That it can be enforced and what are we going to do now.§

Among LGBT people in Brunei there was now a pervasive sense of fear and a desire to leave the country, the Guardian has learned.Several have left already, seeking asylum in countries such as Canada.

Three LGBT people in Brunei declined to speak to the Guardian because they were frightened of the new laws.

The new punishments have also been greeted by shock from abroad, sparking international condemnation from human rights groups and celebrities.

The United Nations labelled the laws ※cruel and inhumane§ and well-known figures have lined up to add to their names to the chorus of condemnation, including former US vice president Joe Biden and actress Jamie Lee Curtis. George Clooney and pop star Elton John have called for Brunei-owned hotels to be boycotted.

The foreign ministries of Germany, France and Australia have protested the plan and called on Brunei to scrap the laws.
But the sultan shows no sign of backing down, and the Muslim-majority country issued a statement at the weekend insisting that Brunei ※enforces its own rule of law§. In a public address on Wednesday, he called for ※stronger§ Islamic teachings in the country and said said that Brunei was ※fair and happy§.

He said that he wanted the Muslim call to prayer to ring out in all public places, not just in mosques, to remind people of their Islamic duties.

※Anyone who comes to visit this country will have a sweet experience, and enjoy the safe and harmonious environment,§ he said, failing to mention the controversial new laws.

The sultan 每 who is one of the world＊s wealthiest men and lives in a vast, golden-domed palace 每 announced plans for the penal code in 2013 and the first phase was introduced the following year.

This included less stringent penalties, such as fines or jail terms for offences including indecent behaviour, failure to attend Friday prayers, and out-of-wedlock pregnancies.

Phil Robertson, Asia deputy director for Human Rights Watch, said: ※This kind of law doesn＊t belong in the 21st century. It＊s going to be something that will turn Brunei into a human rights pariah.§

Analysts say he is seeking to burnish his Islamic credentials and shore up support among the country＊s conservatives due to the waning fortunes of the oil-dependent economy, which has been ravaged by recession in recent years.

※This [sharia code] is not a product of popular demand,§ said Tim Lindsey, a specialist on sharia law in Southeast Asia at Australia＊s Melbourne University, ※it is not a product of pressure from conservative Islamist groups. This is a direct, top-down creation, it is something the sultan has pushed extremely hard for over decades. His political legitimacy relies to a great extent on his displaying Islamic credentials.§

It is also unclear whether death by stoning will actually be implemented, as a high burden of proof is needed to hand down the punishment and Brunei has not executed anyone for decades.

Brunei: Homosexuality And Adultery Will Be Punishable By Death By Stoning The law will go into effect this week.
"In the onslaught of news where we see the world backsliding into authoritarianism, this stands alone", wrote George Clooney in a guest column for Deadline last week. 

The actor＊s hanger is motivated by a bill which is going into effect this week in the Sultanate of Brunei in South East Asia stipulating that homosexual relationships and adultery will now be punishable by death. The new legislation will  also order  amputation  as a punishment for theft - amid a series of new measures in accordance with the sharia. 

That is why the American actor called for a boycott of all the hotels owned by the oil monarchy across the world, nine of the most exclusive hotels ever,  including the Beverly Hills Hotel. 

"Every single time we stay at or take meetings at or dine at any of these nine hotels we are putting money directly into the pockets of men who choose to stone and whip to death their own citizens for being gay or accused of adultery," warns George Clooney. 

The actor admits having stayed in a few, saying at the time he "hadn＊t done (his) homework and didn＊t know who owned them". It is not the first time that celebrities are speaking up against the tiny (yet 5th richest worlwide) nation. Five years ago, many of them including Ellen DeGeneres, Anna Wintour, and Richard Branson had called for a boycott of the hotels owned by the Sultan of Brunei. 

Boycott Has Proven To Be Effective In The Past
This initiative had allowed delaying the adoption of the law aiming to criminalize adultery and homosexuality, although the latter was already illegal. 

Starting April 3, anyone found guilty of homosexuality or cheating on their spouse could be whipped or stoned  according to  an announcement posted by the country＊s attorney general  on December 19, 2018. Muslim witnesses will have to testify to make a case against someone. 

However, a religious affairs ministry spokesman said on Wednesday that Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah, Brunei＊s leader, was expected to make an announcement on April 3 about the enforcement of Sharia:  

"Only after the event, we will know regarding the date of the implementation of the new laws. In terms of readiness, at the moment we are prepared to enforce the amputation of the hand for stealing only. That is all." 

Several online petitions are calling foreign States to put pressure on the monarchy until Wednesday when the Sultan will reach his final decision. 

Earlier this week, the deputy commanding general of U.S. Army Pacific met with Brunei＊s second minister of defense. While the visit itself was just the latest interaction between the two sides, it nonetheless put the focus on some of the ongoing activity within the broader defense relationship between them.

As I have observed previously in these pages, the United States and Brunei 每 a small but nonetheless important player in Southeast Asia on a range of regional security issues in the Indo-Pacific region, from terrorism to the South China Sea 每 have an ongoing defense relationship, which includes various bilateral components such as ship visits, staff talks, and exchanges, along with other wider multilateral components as well such as the Southeast Asian state＊s involvement in the Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training (CARAT) exercise and the Southeast Asia Cooperation and Training (SEACAT) drills.

Over the past few years, both sides have continued to develop the U.S.-Brunei defense relationship amid wider domestic and regional developments. Indeed, just last August, we witnessed a new development in the bilateral relationship with the holding of Exercise Pahlawan Warrior under the segment of Pacific Pathways, which constituted the first bilateral training exercise of its kind between the armies of the United States and Brunei. This was in addition to other bilateral and multilateral defense engagements both sides have had, including the 17th iteration of SEACAT and the 26th biennial Rim of Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise.

This week, the defense relationship was in the spotlight again when John P. Johnson, the deputy commanding general of U.S. Army Pacific (USARPAC) was in Brunei. Johnson took up his current post back in July 2018, just after the U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM) saw its name changed to the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM).

Johnson＊s visit to Brunei included a series of interactions. He met with a range of officials including Brunei＊s second minister of defense (the defense minister portfolio is still held by the country＊s leader, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah) and the commander of the Royal Brunei Armed Forces.

According to Brunei＊s defense ministry (MINDEF), during Johnson＊s meeting with the second minister of defense, both sides reviewed the status of their bilateral collaboration, including those specific to army-to-army ties as evidenced by the holding of Pahlawan Warrior last year.

Unsurprisingly, few additional specifics were publicly provided by either side on their private deliberations, including potential additional collaboration that may be in the works for the rest of 2019 and further out. Nonetheless, the evolution of the U.S.-Brunei defense relationship will continue to be interesting to watch in the years that come amid wider domestic and regional developments and how both sides respond to them.