China scrapped import shipment of American pork in the biggest cancellation in more than a year as US-China trade war escalated
Prior to the trade war, China and Hong Kong combined were the second largest export market for US pork
The same week US President Donald Trump announced sweeping increases on tariffs against Chinese goods, Chinese buyers dropped orders for 3,247 metric tonnes of US pork – the biggest cancellation in more than a year, according to US Department of Agriculture data released on Thursday.
The cancellation came during the week ended May 9, a blow to the US$6.5 billion export market for American pork, vital to the burgeoning US meat industry.
Prior to the trade war, China and Hong Kong combined were the second largest export market for US pork.
For months, the US farm sector – which has been among the hardest hit by the trade war between the world’s two largest economies – has been banking on China increasing its US pork purchases due to African swine fever (ASF).
But the trade war, and China’s tariffs against US pork, is showing signs of slowing China’s willingness to load up on the meat, say industry analysts.
Earlier this year, China cancelled sales of 53 metric tonnes in the week ended February 28, sales of 999 metric tonnes in the week ended March 21, and 214 metric tonnes in the week ended April 18, according to USDA data.
Market analysts said the cancellation news on Thursday weighed on the lean hog futures market.
“It’s just disappointing that this trade war could drag on for months and that means more tariffs on pork,” said Dennis Smith, commodity broker with Archer Financial Services. “This should not be happening. We should be selling a lot of pork to China, because of ASF.”
African swine fever kills almost all pigs infected, though it is not harmful to people. The disease has spread rapidly across China, the world’s top pork producer. In neighbouring Vietnam the government said it will mobilise its military and police forces to combat an outbreak.
USDA said on Thursday that it will soon begin testing sick and dead pigs for the hog virus that has killed herds across Asia in an effort to minimise devastation if the disease enters the United States.


How China’s military upgrade and trade tensions are challenging the US in Indo-Pacific
Tensions between the United States and China are resurgent in May over the issue of trade as long-standing negotiations between the two sides fall apart.
At the same time, the US Department of Defence’s release of an annual report on Chinese military capabilities for American lawmakers has drawn attention to China’s ongoing military modernisation and expansion.
This year’s report mostly continues to discuss trends that have been highlighted in recent years, with a focus on Beijing’s use of espionage to steal military intellectual property, its growing expeditionary capabilities – including the development of a second indigenous aircraft carrier – and investment in emerging technologies.
The Pentagon’s report makes clear that the US sees Chinese initiatives in the Xi Jinping era, such as the “Belt and Road Initiative” and “Made in China 2025”, as strategic and economic threats.
“China’s leaders have softened their rhetoric when promoting these programmes without altering the programmes’ fundamental strategic goals,” it said.
This much was apparent at the second Belt and Road Forum, when Xi emphasised that China’s objectives were positive-sum in nature.
The Trump administration has openly recognised the competitive nature of relations with China, and military-to-military contacts with Beijing have frayed since the years of the Obama administration.
Last year, China was disinvited from the Rim of the Pacific multilateral naval exercise over Beijing’s militarisation of features in the South China Sea.
China’s leaders’ use of these “tactics short of armed conflict”, as the report called them, has drawn concern for years.
The US, regional powers and like-minded countries have faced a serious challenge trying to deter Beijing’s fait accompli in the Indo-Pacific. The Trump administration hasn’t cracked that problem quite yet.
The US report has also underscored ongoing nuclear developments in China’s military. For the first time, the report confirmed the existence of six constructed Type 094 ballistic missile submarines, the cornerstone of China’s sea-based nuclear deterrent.
Separately, the report clarified that while China’s air force, for the first time since the late 1970s or early 1980s, has a nuclear mission, it does not have any actively fielded nuclear capabilities.
That capability will come in the next few years as the air force tests and deploys a new strategic air-launched ballistic missile known to the US intelligence community as the CH-AS-X-13.
Nothing in the report, importantly, shores up the hypothesis that appears to be growing in the Trump administration concerning Beijing’s involvement in strategic trilateral arms control talks with the US and Russia.
Rejected by China’s foreign ministry in early May, the idea fails to grapple with the sheer quantitative divergences between the Chinese, Russian and American nuclear arsenals – a fact the Pentagon report highlights.
Will China’s embrace of military AI trigger a new arms race?
Moreover, given China’s nondeployment of warheads on missiles during peacetime, a new arms control arrangement in the style of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (Start), would effectively count Beijing’s deployed warheads as zero – or perhaps a handful – if some warheads were deployed on submarines.
Importantly, the Pentagon’s view that a Taiwan Strait contingency remains the most likely warfighting scenario for the People’s Liberation Army – a view supported by official Chinese sources – has not changed.
In particular, in recent years, Beijing’s relationship with the Democratic Progressive Party-led Taiwanese government has been acerbic, resulting in Taipei’s loss of three diplomatic allies in 2018 alone.
In the meantime, the PLA has continued to develop capabilities that would augment its ability to penetrate Taiwan’s robust anti-access capabilities.
What is clear is that the military dimensions of US-China competition remain as serious as ever, even as tensions over trade begin to compound.
Conflict between the two countries is not an inevitability and predicting a clash along the lines of the Thucydides Trap – a term for the idea that the rivalry between an established power and a rising one often ends in war – is an oversimplification.
Nevertheless, China’s impressive continuing military modernisation at a time of growing overt competition presents a formidable challenge to the US in preserving its place atop the Indo-Pacific.


Who’s coming when? Steven Mnuchin’s trade talks travel plan is news to Beijing
China ‘unaware’ of any such arrangements, commerce ministry says after US treasury secretary tells Congressional hearing he will be heading back to Beijing soon
Negotiations damaged by the US ‘unilaterally and continuously’ escalating the conflict, ministry spokesman says China is unaware of any plans for US negotiators to visit Beijing for a new round of trade talks, its commerce ministry said on Thursday, suggesting there has been no let up in tensions between the world’s two largest economies.
“China is not aware of the United States’ trip plan,” ministry spokesman Gao Feng told a press conference.
“Both sides had candid and constructive communications in the last round of talks, but very regretfully the US unilaterally and continuously escalated the trade conflict, which led to grave damage to the discussions.”
Gao’s comments came after US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told a Congressional hearing on Wednesday that he expected to visit Beijing soon to continue the trade talks.
The latest discussions in Washington were “constructive” but a lot of work remained to be done before the two sides could reach a deal, he said.
“My expectation is we will most likely go to Beijing at some point in the near future to continue those discussions and I think it’s President [Donald] Trump’s expectation to meet with President Xi [Jinping] at the G20 at the end of June.”
There have been suggestions that talks could be held in Beijing before the end of the month to give negotiators the chance to settle their differences before the new tariff increases take effect on June 1.
Mnuchin is the joint head of the United States’ negotiating team with US Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, a China hawk who has insisted any deal must include an enforcement mechanism to ensure Beijing sticks to any commitments it makes.
Tensions between the two sides escalated last week when Trump made good on his threat to more than double the tariff rate on US$200 billion worth of Chinese imports to 25 per cent after accusing Beijing of backtracking on pledges it had made in earlier rounds of talks. China hit back by imposing the same level of tariffs on US$60 billion of US products.
Gao also repeated Beijing’s threat that it would apply further countermeasures if the US insisted on levying tariffs on the remaining US$300 billion worth of goods it imports from China.
Chen Long, an economist with Gavekal Dragnomics in Beijing, said the two sides still had a number of “sticky issues” to discuss, including the timing and process for removing tariffs already imposed, and agreeing what products and how many of them China should buy to help improve its trade balance with the US.
“The latest tariffs add an extra layer of complexity to any future negotiations,” Chen said, adding that when it came to reaching an agreement, the US negotiators were at the mercy of the president.
“Trump has the final say [on what the US will accept],” he said.
This will kill my market: Chinese exporters react to Trump’s tariff plan
The uncertainty now surrounding the trade talks could be the straw that broke the camel’s back for some US firms operating in China, industry insiders said.
“Trade diplomacy is an exercise in patience, persistence and consistency – it’s all about saving face,” said James Zimmerman, a partner in the Beijing office of international law firm Perkins Coie and a former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China.
“For the US to achieve good concessions from the Chinese, it’s about having a strategy that is effective. Bullying and bluster never works.”
Wang Yong, an international relations professor at Peking University, said the US had not given proper weight to China’s concerns but had only demanded it push ahead with reforms and amend its laws.
“The text of the deal does not show equality and undermines China’s sovereignty,” he said.


Donald Trump’s trade war and souring relations with North Korea hamper China’s efforts to reach out to its neighbours
Efforts to improve relations with Japan and South Korea face additional hurdles while resolving the dispute with the US is the top priority
China’s efforts to reach out to its East Asian neighbours have been hampered by the difficulties surrounding the North Korean peace process and the protracted trade war with the US, according to sources.
Chinese President Xi Jinping will visit Japan for G20 summit on June 28 and 29 in Osaka, and both Japanese and South Korean officials are exploring the possibility of him making a state visit to the two countries.
A South Korean government official said the trade war with the US has given Beijing stronger impetus to improve ties with Seoul and Tokyo.
He said the three Asian economies are planning to hold their annual trilateral summit in Beijing in autumn, and China will use to occasion to appeal to its neighbours, both staunch US allies, for support on trade issues.
But a potential visit by Xi to Seoul, possibly after Osaka, has been put on hold by Beijing due to the uncertainties surrounding both its trade negotiations with the US and the North Korean talks.
China does not want to be seen to snub Pyongyang should Xi visit its southern neighbour, but equally does not want to upset Washington before the trade talks are concluded.
Chinese officials had hoped that a visit by Xi would build on the recent thaw in ties following their disagreement over the installation of a US anti-missile system in 2017.
South Korea's parliamentary speaker Moon Hee-sang visited Beijing last week and urged Xi to visit Seoul, saying in a meeting with China’s Vice-President Wang Qishan that it would help to strengthen relations between the two nations.
But South Korean sources said China’s first priority was the trade talks with the US, and it has yet to give a definite answer to Seoul’s request for a presidential visit.
“China’s first priority has always been resolving its trade dispute with the US … visiting Seoul and possibly Pyongyang comes into that equation,” said a South Korean parliamentary source from the foreign affairs and unification committee.
But in the current climate South Korea has also quietly changed its calculations and slowly carved out a new role amid the changing geopolitical landscape in Asia.
North Korean slams ‘unlawful and outrageous’ seizure of ship
“Our attitude has been different from Japan....Japan has closely aligned itself with the US. But we are equally cautious when dealing with all big powers,” the official said.
Under President Moon Jae-in, South Korea has shifted its stance towards its northern neighbour and, rather than aligning itself with the United States, has engaged with the North with the goal of promoting eventual reunification – thereby moved its position closer to Beijing’s.
Seoul is also a potential target for Trump’s tariffs – and the US President is expected to decide by Saturday whether to slap duties of up to 25 per cent on South Korean car imports and components.
The US is South Korea’s second-largest trading partner after China and vehicles are South Korea’s top export item to the US, worth US$13.6 billion last year.
China, which already passed the United States in 2003 to become South Korea’s largest trading partner, is taking advantage of the opportunity at a time when Seoul is pulling away from the US, according to a Chinese analyst.
South Korea’s economic woe is a warning to other Asian countries
“Since last year, China has been actively seeking to improve relations with its neighbouring countries, and improving ties with South Korea has become part of the trend,” said Shi Yuanhua, a specialist on Korea studies with Fudan University.
But the South Korean official said China still needs to tread carefully.
Beijing has become more cautious about using its influence over North Korea after Donald Trump accused Beijing of stalling progress on the denuclearisation process.
Talks between Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in February collapsed at their summit in Hanoi and with UN sanctions still in place Beijing has little flexibility in dealing with the North.
“If Xi was to visit Seoul without visiting Pyongyang, it is likely that this would anger Kim Jong-un,” said the official. “But going to Pyongyang may carry the risk of complicating US-China talks. It is unlikely that China can offer North Korea anything before the trade talks with the US concludes.”
Trump: North Korea’s missile testing not a ‘breach of trust’
As Beijing’s only treaty ally, Pyongyang would usually by the first priority for a visiting Chinese head of state.
However, when Xi first visited the Korean peninsula as head of state in 2014 he only visited the South because relations with the North were at a low ebb due to a series of missile launches and the execution of Kim’s uncle Jang Song-thaek, who had been considered one of the most important pro-Beijing figures in Pyongyang.


Experts doubt China’s ability to launch assault on Taiwan
US report outlines potential military options Beijing may be considering to fulfil its unification ambitions
But questions remain over Chinese amphibious landing capability which would be crucial to any operation
Beijing is gearing up its efforts to reunify the self-ruled island of Taiwan, but might lack the core assault landing capabilities to conquer the island, military experts said.
The assessment follows an annual report to the US Congress saying China was likely to be preparing for a contingency to unify Taiwan by force, while simultaneously deterring, delaying, or denying any third-party intervention on the island’s behalf.
The 136-page report, “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019”, was released last week and listed a number of options, including a blockade to cut off Taiwan’s imports accompanied by large-scale missile strikes and the occupation of offshore islands like Quemoy (also known as Kinmen) and Matsu.
An air and missile attack might aim to destroy important military and communications infrastructure, while a full-scale invasion might start at northern or southern points along the west coast, according to the Pentagon report.
Experts have cast doubt on the Chinese military’s ability to launch an amphibious operation to reunify Taiwan. Photo: WeiboExperts have cast doubt on the Chinese military’s ability to launch an amphibious operation to reunify Taiwan. Photo: Weibo
Experts have cast doubt on the Chinese military’s ability to launch an amphibious operation to reunify Taiwan. Photo: Weibo
Beijing is gearing up its efforts to reunify the self-ruled island of Taiwan, but might lack the core assault landing capabilities to conquer the island, military experts said.
The assessment follows an annual report to the US Congress saying China was likely to be preparing for a contingency to unify Taiwan by force, while simultaneously deterring, delaying, or denying any third-party intervention on the island’s behalf.
The 136-page report, “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2019”, was released last week and listed a number of options, including a blockade to cut off Taiwan’s imports accompanied by large-scale missile strikes and the occupation of offshore islands like Quemoy (also known as Kinmen) and Matsu.
An air and missile attack might aim to destroy important military and communications infrastructure, while a full-scale invasion might start at northern or southern points along the west coast, according to the Pentagon report.
Turning to Taiwan’s defences, the report noted the island’s advantages continue to decline as China’s military modernisation proceeds, with significant problems in recruiting sufficient military personnel. Taiwan also faces “considerable equipment and readiness challenges”, the report said.
Military analyst Collin Koh, from the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies at Singapore’s Nanyang Technological University, said an amphibious operation to take over the island, as outlined in the report, was unlikely due to China’s inadequate sealift capability and inability of its amphibious forces to work in concert with other services.
“Amphibious assault landing operations, are after all, highly complex operations that require so many moving parts across branches and services that it’ll take much effort and time to promote and inculcate that concept and spirit of fighting jointly and in an integrated manner,” he said.
Koh’s view was echoed by Timothy Heath, a senior international defence research analyst at US think tank Rand, who said inadequate numbers of ships capable of transporting troops for an invasion remained an important shortfall for any Chinese military plan to invade Taiwan.
“Amphibious assault ships and other vessels for conveying combat troops onto the beaches of Taiwan are essential because invasion is the only way the PLA can guarantee conquest of Taiwan,” said Heath, adding that the PLA currently has a relatively modest inventory of such ships.
However, Beijing-based military expert Li Jie said China’s armed forces could accomplish goals as long as orders came from China’s top leaders, despite various weaknesses in the Chinese military.
“And, when compared to the past, China’s amphibious combat capabilities have already improved after extensive training in recent years,” Li said.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei nosedived after Tsai Ing-wen from the independence-leaning Democratic Progressive Party became the island’s president in May 2016 and repeatedly refused to endorse the “1992 consensus” which refers to an understanding that there is only one China, though each side may have its own interpretation of what constitutes “China”.
Poll boost for Taiwan’s Tsai Ing-wen after tough stand against Beijing
Beijing responded by stepping up military and diplomatic pressure against the island, ramping up live-fire military exercises and luring away Taiwan’s diplomatic allies.
Taiwan is now one of a growing number of flashpoints in the China-US relationship – along with a trade war, Beijing’s growing influence in emerging economies, and its stronger military posture in the South China Sea.
On Monday, two guided-missile destroyers, USS Preble and USS Chung-Hoon passed within 12 nautical miles of Gaven and Johnson reefs in the Spratly Islands, drawing immediate criticism from Beijing.
Beijing ‘loses all hope for Taiwan’s Tsai’ as she courts Washington
The lower chamber of the US Congress on Tuesday unanimously backed legislation supporting Taiwan, which faces military and diplomatic pressure from mainland China as Washington pushes for a harder-edged approach to relations with Beijing.
Under the Taiwan Relations Act, the United States is bound by law to help defend the self-ruled island. Washington is Taipei’s main source of arms, selling the island more than US$15 billion in weaponry since 2010, according to the Pentagon.

