Have promise, will travel: The true cost of election jetsetting.

It’s the one campaign costing that politicians don’t want to debate: Who is paying for Prime Minister Scott Morrison and Labor leader Bill Shorten to fly around Australia campaigning in a chartered jet?

Despite millions of taxpayer dollars flowing to major political parties through public funding, you would be wrong if you assumed that the political donors are paying.

And that’s just the beginning of the campaign costs.

Until this election, there was a political convention that the leaders, ministers and shadow ministers did not claim nightly travel allowances of around $300 a night after the party’s official campaign launches.

But The New Daily has  confirmed that is no longer the case.

With the audit of election expenses shifting to the Independent Parliamentary Expenses Authority (IPEA), both sides of politics can travel on chartered and domestic flights and claim travel allowance all the way to election day.

That also includes the cost of hundreds of political staffers from around the country deployed to the Labor and Liberal Party headquarters in Sydney’s western suburbs and Brisbane, respectively.

As long as the staffers are “directed” to do this political work by MPs, they are deemed to be operating within the rules to claim travel allowance.

Who pays? The short answer is taxpayers.

Since the first federal election in 1901, which cost 50,000 British pounds, the cost of election has grown exponentially.

The 2016 double-dissolution election cost $286 million. But that’s just the cost of running the election – it doesn’t include the travel of the leaders or staff and travel allowances.

Many would argue it’s simply the cost of democracy.

But when The New Daily asked the Liberal Party to explain who paid for flights and political staffers and whether there are political lobbyists at HQ, it declined to provide a detailed response.

“Please refer to the caretaker conventions regarding distinction over which costs are claimed by, or paid for by parties,” a Liberal campaign spokesman said.

“All ministerial staff and ministers comply with the Lobbying Code of Conduct and their relevant ministerial standards (Statement of Ministerial Standards – Minister , Statement of Ministerial Staff Standards – Staff ).”

The Department of Finance declined to answer questions, arguing it was a matter for IPEA.

But IPEA pointed out that the special purpose flights were organised by the Defence Department.

The Defence Department referred The New Daily back to the Department of Finance, which administers the flights, returning the question to the department where it began.

The huge cost of traversing the country during the 2016 campaign is outlined by the Defence Department in a special Election Supplement.

On the first day alone flight costs of more than $30,000 were run up, including flying Barnaby Joyce home to Tamworth at a cost of more $7000.

The plane returned to Canberra empty, which is not unusual.

Flights for the travelling media contingent are traditionally met by media organisations, with costs divided among the journalists, photographers and camera operators on board.

But a chartered flight from Sydney to Perth – carrying the Prime Minister and his staff – regularly costs $20,000.







Chloe Shorten and Jenny Morrison: Women on a mission

Chloe Shorten and Jenny Morrison are two very different women, but when they hit the campaign trail there’s no mystery to their identical mission.

Their power lies with their ability to soften, humanise and transform the image of their respective husbands in the eyes of voters beyond the “smirking’’ Scott Morrison and the “smarmy’’ Bill Shorten.

“I’ve seen what a great listener Bill is. Especially to those without power,’’ Chloe Shorten told Labor’s campaign launch on Sunday.

“He is truly a man for others. And what a strong advocate for people without a platform.”

Mrs Shorten has public service in her DNA.

Her mother Quentin Bryce is a former Governor-General and now her husband could be Australia’s next prime minister in a fortnight.

While Australia does not have a First Lady in the sense of the US presidency, there’s no doubt political spouses can play an important role in campaigns.

A feminist and former executive, Mrs Shorten encouraged her husband to back same-sex marriage and tackle domestic violence, but her role in the launch was a tour de force in tradition.

Describing her husband as “caring, smart, funny, gentle’’ on Sunday, Mrs Shorten said her husband was “a wonderful dad, a terrible dancer”.

She also had another weapon in her arsenal – she’s a Queenslander by birth, a key battleground for Labor.

“It’s so lovely to be home,’’ she said.

“Let me talk about the one who I love – caring, smart, funny, gentle. He is a wonderful dad, a terrible dancer, and a very proud bulldog owner,’’ she said.

“Brisbane is where Bill got to know my elder two children when they were very little. He would take them to parks and to South Bank, to beaches. He would patiently play and listen to them for hours and hours. In our life together, that’s what I’ve seen.”

Both were previously married – Mr Shorten to Debbie Beale and Mrs Shorten to architect Roger Parkin. She had two children with her first husband – Rupert and Georgette – before divorcing and marrying Mr Shorten. They have a third child together, Clementine.

Both women are also a huge emotional support to their husbands, who often seem happier and more relaxed when their other half joins the campaign.

The Prime Minister and his wife Jenny met as teenagers and have been together since. Soon they will celebrate 30 years of marriage.

Mrs Morrison’s down-to-earth attitude and modest style is a winner with working-class voters.  She admits she has never been a political person and is never seen in a power suit or expensive, designer clothes.

While she has a passion for mental health, she’s devoted herself to raising her girls rather than high-profile charity work. She spends hours in the car each day driving her girls back and forth to their primary school in Mr Morrison’s electorate and the PM’s official residence.

On Sunday, she spoke of her battle with depression as a new mother. She has previously revealed her 14-year battle to conceive her two daughters.

“Yes, I was very sad that I couldn’t have children,” she once said. “That framed a lot of my life.”

But when the girls arrived, she admitted motherhood could also be tough and lonely with her husband away for 20 weeks of the year or longer in Canberra.

“I remember very clearly sitting on the front steps of the house, holding a newborn, with a two-year-old running around [thinking], ‘I just can’t wait for him to walk back in that door’,” Mrs Morrison said.

She told the Sunday Telegraph: “I found myself at the doctor’s going, ‘I’m trying to do everything and I just can’t seem to do it all’.”

She also revealed that she found online comments that disrespected her Christian faith “hurtful”.

“People are always going to have those reactions to Christianity and I do not know why,” Mrs Morrison said. “To paint us all as whatever they want to paint us as is hurtful No.1, and disrespectful.”









An awkward truth: Why the 2019 budget isn’t really ‘back in black’ yet

The ABC’s Leigh Sales began her interview with Treasurer Josh Frydenberg on budget night by offering a simple truth.

“You told the Parliament the budget is back in the black. It is still in the red,” she said.

The Treasurer responded with an answer that the late, great John Clarke of Clarke and Dawe fame would have included in one of his political sketches.

“It is a surplus,” Mr Frydenberg insisted. 

Except, it isn’t. It’s a forecast surplus for 2019-20 of $7.1 billion. This year, the budget is still in deficit. 

“We are in 2018-19. It is a deficit this year of $4.2 billion,” Sales observed. 

No, the Treasurer insisted, it is a “credible trajectory” over the next four years.

But surely, Mr Frydenberg was pressed, it might not happen?

“No, it will happen,” he promised.

The man who will be treasurer after the election, if you believe the polls, declared the budget an “underwhelming document”.

“In fact, this is a budget by a government which has given up governing,” Labor’s Chris Bowen said.

It’s a line the Labor Party recycles multiple times a day. 

“As for the surplus … I mean nearly a quarter of it comes from spending less on people. The rest comes from highly heroic wages assumptions and disabled people – which this budget again downgrades as every other Liberal budget has done,” Mr Bowen said.

“It jumps up then like a magic beanstalk … to return to higher levels to underpin a surplus and the rest comes from a higher tax revenues and high commodity prices, which are nothing to do with Canberra or the federal government.

“The government has forecast a return to surplus. It hasn’t delivered one, but it’s forecast one and the forecast is subject to some questions, particularly around wages.” 

Based on the figures, Mr Bowen insisted Labor would deliver a better budget bottom line than the government, a promise that remains just that. There are no guarantees.

Of course, Labor’s policy decisions also involve tax increases under negative gearing reforms and other measures.

Expect to hear more of that all the way to election day. 









Budget 2019: Economists say government forecasts are optimistic

The growth forecasts underpinning the federal budget look a touch optimistic, according to economists.

The federal budget contained few surprises for watchers who for months had predicted the government would offer consumer tax relief and infrastructure spending to stimulate economic growth against a backdrop of low wage growth and falling house prices.

Economists agreed with Treasurer Josh Frydenberg that a $100 billion, 10-year infrastructure spend and lower than expected cost of the National Disability Insurance Scheme will contribute to a surplus in the next financial year, but some anticipate it being lower than the $7.1 billion flagged on Tuesday night.

And echoing their frequent – eventually justified – opinion that the Reserve Bank had been overly bullish with its growth forecasts, many said the government was being too optimistic about the likely pace of GDP growth.

The NAB team including chief economist Alan Oster expects economic growth of about 2.25 per cent in the 2019/20 financial year, compared to Treasury’s forecast of 2.75 per cent.

“Our profile sees the consumer still struggling with their cashflow and hence with any discretionary spend,” the NAB economists said.

“Also house price falls will see construction activity fall another 20 per cent over the next two years.”

BIS Oxford Economics chief economist Sarah Hunter and AMP chief economist Shane Oliver were similarly sceptical, the latter predicting 2.3 per cent economic growth in 2019/20 and for wage growth to undershoot budget forecasts in each of the two years after that.

“The main risk is that the revenue boost is not sustained and the budget continues to have relatively optimistic assumptions regarding wages growth,” Dr Oliver said.

The budget should ease some of the pressure on the RBA to cut the cash rate, although Ms Hunter said there is still “a significant risk” that they will do so to support the economy.

The RBA indicated it was monitoring downside risks when it again held the cash rate at its record low 1.5 per cent on Tuesday, and the market is still pricing in at least one 0.25 percentage point rate cut before the end of 2019.

NAB said the infrastructure spend unveiled on Tuesday, NDIS spend and LNG exports should support the economy, but wondered how much of the budget would actually become reality given the looming federal election.

“This budget needs to be seen in its political context,” NAB economists said.

“It is more like an election manifesto than a traditional budget and big questions remain around what parts, if any, will actually be implemented.”









There’s no spinning the ugly truth when politicians’ online words are way out of line

The dumping of five federal election candidates this week over offensive online comments shows how social media can be a “useful tool” for voters, say political analysts.

It comes as Labor’s 28-year-old candidate for Melbourne, Luke Creasey, quit on Friday after being exposed over a number of Facebook “jokes” he made in 2012 about rape, group sex and lesbians.

His resignation followed Friday morning’s decision by Liberal candidate for Lyons, Jessica Whelan, to step down amid uproar over anti-Muslim sentiments expressed on social media.

Liberal candidate for Isaacs, Jeremy Hearn, was also dumped over anti-Muslim online comments, while Labor NT Senate candidate Wayne Kurnorth was dropped for sharing an anti-Semitic conspiracy theory and an Islamic State-themed meme online.

Another Liberal candidate, Peter Killin in the seat of Wills, was disendorsed after it was revealed he had plotted to stop gay people being elected to office and party positions.

Monash University senior politics lecturer Dr Zareh Ghazarian said scrutiny of candidates’ social media accounts was a “useful tool for voters” because it can allow them to see and judge candidates’ unguarded public comments.

“If (the comments) are controversial or distasteful, we’re fortunate now that the technology exists for them to be held accountable and judged accordingly by the parties and voters,” Dr Ghazarian told The New Daily.

“It’s not necessarily going to do long-lasting damage to the party because most of these candidates were in seats where they were unlikely to win anyway, but the damage is that it derails the party’s overall campaign.”

He also said that one of the broader effects of recent social media scandals was that it worsened the public’s perception of politicians.

Monash University senior politics lecturer Dr Nick Economou said he was particularly disappointed to see young candidates caught out for posting offensive material online.

“I often hear that young people have to get involved in politics, but so far they’re not making a particularly good contribution,’ Dr Economou told The New Daily. 

“I thought everybody had been socially conditioned not to be vile to people on the basis of their sexuality or their religion, and yet people are and they seem to be young people.”

What if a candidate is disendorsed?
You can still vote for a candidate who has resigned or been disendorsed, but you will not be able to vote for that candidate as a representative of the political party he or she formerly represented.

Instead, you will be able to vote for them only as an Independent.

For example, if you planned to give former Labor candidate Luke Creasey your vote, you can mark your ballot that way, but your vote will no longer go to Labor.

The reason for this is because the ballot papers for the May 18 election have already been printed, which means the names of disendorsed candidates will still appear on them.

Can a disendorsed candidate still win?
The chances are slim but not impossible.

In 1996, Pauline Hanson won the seat of Oxley after being disendorsed by the Liberal Party over her controversial comments published in The Queensland Times that called for the government to get rid of welfare assistance for Aboriginal people.

She carried on to win the historically safe Labor seat as an independent.