Singapore’s political opposition does not have a strong track record.

The city-state, which celebrated its 53rd birthday this month, has been governed by one political entity, the People’s Action Party, since independence. In that time, the former trading outpost has been transformed into an advanced economy — a success story that bolsters the PAP in every election.

Singapore is home to multiple opposition parties, with eight to nine regularly contesting general elections. But poorly defined policies, a dearth of public engagement, and disunity have stymied their performance for decades.

Now, following a shock election result in neighboring Malaysia, opposition parties say they’re trying to change that.

Seven parties held a meeting late last month to discuss banding together to contest the next election, which is due by 2021. If a coalition were formed, it would still be unlikely to upset the PAP by then. The near-term goal is targeting the PAP’s two-thirds parliamentary majority, so the ruling party can no longer easily change the nation’s constitution, opposition leaders told CNBC.

“The current lack of debate in parliament is unhealthy,” said Goh Meng Seng, secretary general of three-year-old opposition group, the People’s Power Party. “There needs to be more diversity of opinions in decision-making processes, — if there isn’t a strong contest of ideas, parliament sittings won’t be taken seriously.”
Helmed by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, the eldest son of Singapore’s founding father Lee Kuan Yew, the PAP controls 83 seats in the 89-strong parliament. The remaining six are under the country’s largest opposition faction, the Workers’ Party, whose performance in the 2011 election saw the PAP’s vote share drop to its lowest-ever level at 60.1 percent. But then in 2015, the PAP saw its margin strengthen to 69.9 percent, boosted by a wave of nostalgia from Lee Kuan Yew’s death that year as well as government spending around the country’s golden jubilee anniversary, such as extra financial support for senior citizens’ healthcare.

Because of its parliamentary majority, the PAP can easily change laws. In late 2016, it modified eligibility criteria for presidential candidates to ensure representation for minority ethnic groups, which resulted in only one candidate qualifying for the 2017 presidential election.

“The weakness of individual parties has prevented any meaningful inroads into the political system, so we’re realizing that we can no longer go at it alone,” said Chee Soon Juan, leader of the Singapore Democratic Party, a 38-year-old opposition faction that hosted July’s meeting.

The Prime Minister’s Office didn’t respond to CNBC’s request for comment. 

Asked to comment on a possible opposition coalition and Singapore’s political future, a PAP spokesperson referred CNBC to Education Minister Ong Ke Yung’s views on one-party rule. The minister told a conference last year that the island isn’t big enough for parties to hold drastically different views on national issues, according to a report in the Straits Times.

While previous attempts at coalition-building have failed, there is a sense of cautious optimism this time around.

July’s meeting came on the heels of Malaysia’s election in May, which saw an opposition coalition defeat a party that had ruled for more than 60 years. That was particularly inspiring, said Goh: “Malaysia and Singapore are so similar in terms of culture, racial mix and mentality so their change in government was a real eye-opener.”

Biggest opposition party didn’t participate
Even if opposition parties are able to unite — a tall order given their disparate interests — it’s not certain how successful they would be.

The Workers’ Party, seen as the most realistic alternative to the PAP, didn’t attend July’s meeting, leading to speculation that it may not be interested in a coalition. It declined to be interviewed for this story.

With or without the Workers’ Party, however, any opposition coalition faces obstacles.

For one, rules restricting freedom of expression and public assemblies have limited the opposition’s engagement with the public. Individuals and media organizations that criticize the government or judiciary have faced civil defamation lawsuits and other restrictions from the government, according to a 2017 report from Human Rights Watch.

Opposition leaders blame the government for hindering their respective parties, but some experts say it’s not that simple.
So far, parties have simply been no match for the PAP in terms of policy or the caliber of candidates, according to Eugene Tan, associate professor of law at Singapore Management University.

Most groups except for the Workers’ Party “tend to go into political hibernation in between general elections,” he said. “Opposition unity is also threadbare, and the ability to pool resources is not their forte either.”

A deep-rooted fear of disruption associated with a change of government, or what local author Cherian George describes as “the politics of comfort,” also obstructs opposition growth.

While many Singaporeans, including millennials, aren’t particularly loyal to the PAP itself, they worry that no other party is capable of steering the economy and continuing the island’s world-class standard of living. To the layperson, a vote for the opposition is often perceived as a threat to their material comfort.

“Many people assume we’re opposing the success of this country, but that’s not at all the case — we simply want to be a meaningful alternative so people have a meaningful choice,” said Chee.

Poorly defined policies are another major criticism of the opposition. Excluding the Workers Party and the SDP, most party websites lack detailed blueprints on hot-button issues such as health care, housing and population growth.

Analysts also caution against any knock-on effects from Malaysia, noting that the opposition’s climb to power there was primarily achieved thanks to widespread backlash over former leader Najib Razak — a vastly different context to Singapore.

Rising costs
The island may lack a strong wave of anti-government sentiment, but discontent about rising prices and doubts over the PAP’s future leadership could work in the opposition’s favor.

Despite its electoral mandate, the PAP has been criticized by many citizens for a 30 percent increase in water prices and this year’s 16.8 percent increase in electricity tariffs. The country’s goods and services tax is also expected to hit 9 percent, from 7 percent currently.

The matter is exacerbated by entrenched perceptions of inequality. A government report released earlier this year revealed a slower pace of income growth for the bottom 50 percent households, contributing to a widening gap between rich and poor. A sizable program of transfers, subsidies and assistance exist for low-income Singaporeans, but social imbalances remain.
In her 2018 book “This Is What Inequality Looks Like,” local sociologist Teo You Yenn examined structures of inequality that are less obvious. For example, subsidies for purchasing public housing apartments are mostly granted to married couples, making it tougher for unwed and single parents who tend to be more economically vulnerable, she pointed out.

According to Goh of the People’s Power Party, public dissatisfaction with PAP policies, especially housing and retirement, will lead to the ruling party losing power within 15 years.

Most Singaporeans have used the maximum amount of their mandatory retirement savings plan allowed for housing purchases, which has compromised their retirement financing, he explained. Many citizens, he added, can only sustain retirement by monetizing their housing investments, but even that is tricky.

“Within 15 years, nearly 60-70 percent of (public housing apartments) will be 40-50 years old, and it will be difficult to sell them since banks turn cautious on loans to new buyers when flats hit the 40-year mark,” Goh stated.

The PAP did not respond to criticism of its housing and retirement policies.







Will Singapore’s politics change as its parties shift to Gen Next?
Both the ruling party and opposition are preparing to move on from established leaders. Their choices will set up the upcoming electoral battle and define the national issues over the next decade

The new office of Singapore’s strongest opposition party sits on the fourth floor of a nondescript building, just streets away from the country’s infamous red-light district in Geylang.
Neat and well-lit, the unit is more humble than haughty. At just 110 square metres – roughly the size of a large public housing flat – it cost the Workers’ Party (WP) about S$900,000 (US$685,000) last year.
The purchase alone is hardly significant in property-mad Singapore. But in a political scene where opposition parties are so weak that many struggle to even rent an office, a permanent home signals an increasingly confident outfit craving ownership both in postcode and polling counts.
It is a transition that will further gather pace from this weekend, as Singapore’s second-oldest active party elects a new leader, moving on from current chief and opposition leader Low Thia Khiang, who has steered the ship for almost two decades.
Singapore’s next prime minister: what’s taking so Loong?
The succession is unlikely to be without problems, given the standing and longevity of Low.
And with just over two years to prepare for the next general election, due to be held by January 2021, the runway for the new man is short.

Should he push for an aggressive strategy to win more seats from the ruling People’s Action Party (PAP), or in the face of legal woes, adopt a defensive posture to safeguard what WP has?
The dilemma will not be easy to resolve, especially in one of Asia’s most asymmetrical democracies, where the dominant PAP controls 93 per cent of parliament.
But the WP will at least be comforted to know its rival is facing its own set of dilemmas over succession and electoral strategy. Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, and leader of the PAP, has set 2022 as the year he will retire but has not given clear indications on who is likely to take over.
At the halfway mark between the last election and the next one, both parties are grappling with a leadership transition.
The outcomes of these leadership transitions will be critical for both parties and Singapore’s politics.
How they turn out will shape the upcoming electoral battle, define the national issues and set the tone for Singapore’s political landscape over the coming decade.
NEW FACE, SAME CHALLENGES
Late last year, during the party’s 60th anniversary celebration, Low shocked the political fraternity when he announced that he would be stepping down from WP’s top post.
Declaring that the party had transformed from a one-man operation to a full-fledged national platform, he said it was time to make way for the younger generation of leaders.
“We now have a team of younger leaders who are ready to drive the party forward … I will therefore not be contesting the post of secretary general at the next party election,” he said.
The front runner to become the next WP chief appears to be a study of stark contrast to Low, a Chinese-educated former teacher and businessman.

A trained lawyer, 41-year-old Pritam Singh speaks with a crisp accent during Parliamentary debates. At election rallies, the Indian politician is a crowd pleaser, peppering his English speeches with witty jokes and snarky jibes at the PAP.
While Low, 61, has no social media presence, Singh gamely poses for selfies and posts them on his Facebook account. But the differences are mostly cosmetic. When it comes to politics, both agree on the role WP should play in Singapore’s political system: a small one, for now.
Meet the Russian risk takers making safe Singapore their home
The goal of WP, as Low had previously stated, is to act as a check and balance against the PAP. It is not ready to form an alternative government because it lacks the resources to do so.
Singh, in an interview with the Singapore Chinese-language daily Lianhe Zaobao last year, echoed this same view. “An important role for the party is to establish trust with Singaporeans. Given the numbers we have, we are a very very small party.”
WP holds just six seats in a parliament which has 89 representatives. PAP controls the other 83.
In fact, should Singh take over, the party is unlikely to change very much, analysts said.
Singapore to raise GST for first time in decade despite surplus – but taxpayers won’t feel pain for at least three years
For one thing, Low will retain strong influence in the party, operating from the back, rather than leading from the front, said Singapore Management University’s (SMU) Eugene Tan.
“It would be hard to match Low’s experience. Low will still play a big role within WP. He’s not quitting politics nor is he fading away,” he said.
Under Low’s charge, WP won the opposition’s biggest prize in Singapore’s Westminster system so far when he won a mega ward, made up of five members of parliament, in 2011. The win at Aljunied was heralded as a turning point in the country’s politics.
It built on that momentum by snatching a seat in 2013 after a by-election was called. At its height, the party boasted seven full MPs, a small but rebellious force facing the ever-dominant PAP.
In the 2015 general election, WP lost a ward and did just enough to hang on to Aljunied.
WP members agreed with Tan’s assessment, adding that a vote for Singh is a vote for continuity.
“Pritam will be extending Low’s legacy and imprint on the party. So a vote for him is a vote for Low,” said a party veteran of more than 20 years, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
RUMBLINGS IN WP
But there could be surprises ahead. There is a group of disgruntled WP party veterans who are unhappy with Low for the way he has treated them over the years.
They complain that he has been giving opportunities to new members, rewarding them with leadership positions and chances to stand at the election, while ignoring the hard work of the old-timers.
“We built the party through our sweat and tears. J.B. Jeyaretnam [the former WP chief] lost his home and his family for the party, and we followed him,” said a party source, who has been with the WP for more than 25 years. “What has the newer bunch of members done?”
Hong Kong sugar babies, Singapore sugar daddies – but it’s NOT about selling sex, these dating websites insist
The bitterness nearly boiled over two years ago. Backed by the unhappy old-timers, Chen Show Mao, part of the team that won Aljunied, launched a surprise bid to wrest the leadership post from Low at the party’s election in 2016.
Chen was a star catch for the WP when he stood under the party’s banner in 2011. A top lawyer, he advised Agricultural Bank of China on its US$22 billion initial public offering, the second biggest IPO in history.
Despite his credentials, Chen didn’t succeed. Low beat Chen with a vote count of 61 to 45, after the party brought in 28 new cadre members, rumoured to be Low’s supporters. WP’s leadership has since played down the 2016 takeover bid, calling it part of a “healthy democratic process”.
Ahead of the party election this weekend, sources in the party said Chen is unlikely to mount another challenge despite Low stepping down.
“He is not keen and wants to lie low. He could be waiting for the right opportunity down the line,” said a source close to Chen.
A TRIAL OF FIRE
That opportunity might come as soon as next year.
The top three WP leaders – Low, Singh and WP chairman Sylvia Lim – are facing a lawsuit over alleged improper payments made to third-party vendors amounting to some S$33 million.

In Singapore, elected MPs run their own estates and collect fees from residents to provide essential services such as maintaining the cleanliness of common areas.
Among other things, the lawsuit alleges that WP overpaid for services to the tune of millions of dollars. The legal action is aimed at recovering the funds. In their defence, the WP leaders said they acted in good faith, with the best interests of residents at heart.
The trial is expected to commence as early as next year or even closer to the general election, which could distract the party from its preparations. WP declined to reply to This Week in Asia’s questions about the lawsuit but analysts say that the outcome of the lawsuit will determine how WP will plan for the upcoming general election.
As Singapore’s population ages, can the Lion City continue to roar?
Should the leaders survive the lawsuit, the WP will be energised and could even galvanise Low and Lim into heading out of Aljunied to attack the PAP in other wards such as East Coast and Marine Parade, both of which could face a change in their incumbent team leaders. Both are mega wards which total nine seats between them. Winning them will allow the WP to make a huge step towards the goal of taking more than a third of the seats, which gives them the power to veto changes in the Singapore constitution.
“I think the WP team will probably disperse and confront the new faces or younger ministers of the PAP,” said political analyst Bilveer Singh from National University of Singapore. “Yes, it will be stupidity for the WP ‘A’ Team, (Low and Lim) to remain where they are, especially in view of the many new talented faces WP has today.”
The new Chee Soon Juan? Singapore activist Jolovan Wham defiant after court charges
If the lawsuit sticks, then WP’s Singh, who is unlikely to be as affected by the lawsuit compared to Low and Lim, will be charged with rebuilding the party in a new post-Low era.
At the top of his list: build a team to defend Aljunied at all costs.
But with Low and Lim gone, Chen could be tempted to mount another challenge against Singh who may find himself outflanked with his key allies gone.
“The uncertainty of the outcome of its leadership transition will be far more consequential to its survival,” said Gillian Koh, Institute of Policy Studies’ deputy director for research.
HAUNTED BY THE PAST
For the PAP, the race to the general election will be dominated by two main concerns: ensuring a smooth roll-out of their leadership succession plan and maintaining their dominance even as they are confronted with a host of new challenges.
As the PAP looks ahead, they are haunted by two events in its electoral past: 1991 and 2011.
The first was supposed to be an election that celebrated the handover of the first generation of leaders to the second.
Najib says Malaysia-Singapore jousting is over. Is it really?
Nine months after taking over from Singapore’s first Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, Goh Chok Tong announced a snap election, seeking a mandate for his gentler approach to politics. Instead of reciprocating the warm embrace, voters gave him the cold shoulder.
PAP won just 61 per cent of the popular vote, the lowest since independence at the time. The opposition also took four seats that year, a stinging rebuke to Goh.

Twenty years later, in 2011, PAP suffered its worst performance in an election since independence in 1965, with 60.1 per cent of the popular vote. Most analysts agree that voters wanted to register firm unhappiness over issues such as the rapid growth of the foreigner population in Singapore, the rising cost of living and the growing income gap.
Not only did it lose a mega ward in Aljunied, it also lost two ministers, one of whom, George Yeo, the chairman of Kerry Logistics, was considered among the finest minds in his generation.
In 2015, PAP had a much better showing, winning landslide 69.9 per cent of the vote. But SMU’s Tan believed the strong win in 2015 was a fluke. That year, voters swung back to the PAP after Lee Kuan Yew died and Singapore celebrated 50 years of independence.
China’s Belt and Road can win world’s trust, Singapore minister tells Davos
The 2015 general election “was an aberration; there will be no SG50 and Lee Kuan Yew ‘dividend’ to boost their electoral performance in the next election. The next GE will be a hard fight for sure given that so much is at stake,” Tan said.
In fact, the uncertainty over just where the new normal for PAP is a big cause for concern for the ruling party; if it is unlikely to be 2015, could 2011 actually be closer to reality?
That worry, coupled with the next PAP leadership transition in progress, is probably why the ruling party has been increasingly harsh on its critics in recent years, says NUS’s Singh.

For instance, K. Shanmugam, PAP’s law minister, grilled Oxford historian Thum Ping Tjin, a prominent critic of the government, in a recent parliament committee hearing over his testimonial on falsehood and fake news. Thum accused the PAP of being the one to spread falsehoods in the past.
Shanmugam later explained that he questioned Thum because the academic made serious allegations against Lee, including calling him a liar. Keeping quiet was therefore was not an option, he said.
Before this show of force, PAP legislators also insisted two WP legislators apologise for statements made in parliament, leading to internet chatter that the PAP was bullying WP. One of them, Leon Perera, a Non-Constituency MP – a post created to allow the top losing MPs to speak in parliament – did apologise in parliament, but the other, WP chairman Lim, refused.
“The PAP hits it [WP] hard because its sails are picking up winds which the PAP strategists don’t like,” observed Bilveer Singh, of NUS.
But the PAP faces a dilemma. Hit the WP too hard and it could destroy the opposition, something that it is reluctant to do. PAP knows it cannot return to the days of an all-PAP parliament, analysts have said. It is bad optics for the government.
“This is a real dilemma. Do you want angry and destructive opposition to rise, which will certainly be the case if opposition parties like the WP are butchered and marginalised or somehow tolerate a malleable WP?” Singh noted.
“I guess the PAP would prefer the latter.”
In this case, the PAP has to walk a fine line between allowing some opposition while not allowing it to grow to such an extent that it becomes a real threat.
To many other governments, this does not seem like such a formidable challenge when the odds are stacked in their favour. But the PAP has long been known for its obsession with longevity and they will act to ensure the party’s future is secure.

WILD CARDS BEWARE
PAP leaders are also likely to be wary of other challenges from former establishment figures that could emerge in its blind spots.
One is the continued drama over Oxley Road, the home of Lee Kuan Yew. The Lee siblings, Lee Hsien Yang and Lee Wei Ling, have been publicly bickering with their elder brother Prime Minister Lee over the future of the home.
The younger Lee siblings want their family home demolished, saying that it was Lee Kuan Yew’s express desire. The Singapore government is disputing that and has so far refrained from taking any action to either demolish or preserve the site.
They’re at it again: Lee Kuan Yew home must be razed, younger children insist
Prime Minister Lee even had to address the issue in parliament last year, opening up his family quarrels to public scrutiny.
The issue is far from over. Just this week, both siblings again criticised a ministerial committee that said the option for keeping the house as a historical site remains open.
There is the possibility that more twists are in store on this front, which could scandalise and embarrass the prime minister as the date for the next election draws closer.
The second wild card is the emergence of a former PAP legislator to contest the party he once fought for. Tan Cheng Bock ran for president in 2011, without the approval of the PAP, and lost by a sliver – about 7,000 votes – to former deputy prime minister Tony Tan.
He was denied the chance to contest last year’s presidential election after it was turned into a reserved election, where only Malays could run. Former parliament speaker Halimah Yacob ran and won unopposed, after two other candidates were disqualified.
Tan has not ruled out running in the general election as an opposition candidate, with sources telling This Week in Asia that he is assembling a team and eyeing wards in the west of Singapore where he was previously an MP with PAP.
SMU’s Tan said it would be no surprise if Tan Cheng Bock did take the jump.
His entry would give the PAP additional worry as Singapore crosses the halfway mark between the last and next general election.
If this is Singapore’s next leader, can he bridge its English-Mandarin divide?
For the PAP, the outcome is not in question – it never was. They will romp to victory and continue to dominate parliament.
But the devil is in the details: how will they get there while navigating the growing desire for checks and balances among the electorate?
For the WP, they remain the most credible opposition Singapore has to offer. But can they continue to do so in the post-Low era?
Amid the uncertainties of both parties, a balance will be found with new leaders setting a fresh equilibrium in the politics of Singapore for the next decade. 







(CNN)Singapore's leave-nothing-to-chance approach to political succession is being thwarted by forces outside its control and some curious decision-making by the Prime Minister.

The man leading the pack to take over as the fourth Prime Minister, Finance Minister Heng Swee Keat, had a massive stroke 15 months ago and has yet to recover fully.
Last week, a curious announcement that Minister of Social and Family Development Tan Chuan-Jin was being nominated for Speaker of Parliament, which many consider a demotion, became a talking point.
Tan replaces Halimah Yacob who this week rose by default to become Singapore's first female president after other potential contenders fell foul of new rules.
How Singapore elected a president without a vote
How Singapore elected a president without a vote
Tan is a member of a core team of ruling People's Action Party (PAP) politicians being groomed to run Singapore as Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong prepares to step aside after the next election, which must be held by January 15, 2021.
He served in the Singapore Armed Forces for almost 24 years before turning to politics in 2011, with roles in a number of ministries. He's also the President of the Singapore National Olympic Council, and an advisor to the National Council of Social Service.
Add to these events the scare that Lee gave to the nation when he nearly collapsed while delivering Singapore's version of the "State of Union" address one year ago, it is clear that political succession is facing a huge setback.
The nomination of Tan, 49, as Speaker, a role he started on Monday, is the most intriguing and leaves many awkward questions which have yet to be answered fully.
Singapore PAP members (front L to R) Edwin Tong, Seah Kian Peng, Tan Chuan-Jin, former prime minister Goh Chok Tong and Fatimah Lateef on September 1, 2015.
Singapore PAP members (front L to R) Edwin Tong, Seah Kian Peng, Tan Chuan-Jin, former prime minister Goh Chok Tong and Fatimah Lateef on September 1, 2015.
For instance, why move a high-flying military general, who was hand-picked to join the ruling party to fight the general elections just six years ago, to a less powerful, less meaningful and less lucrative job as Speaker?
The online world is having a field day questioning the official explanations. PM Lee said Tan is the right politician to preside over Parliamentary debates to ensure full and fair discussions of national issues.
"Chuan-Jin has the temperament and personality for this role," Lee said in a surprise statement last week.

One news website asked pointedly, referring to a mini-reshuffle that had to be done because of Tan's departure from the Cabinet: Wouldn't all this not have been necessary if Tan, a young, energetic and passionate minister had not been moved?
Another asked: Is this a signal that Tan has not made the cut to be in the elite team to govern tomorrow's Singapore? It answered its own question. That does not seem to be the case as Tan rose up the Cabinet ladder to become a full minister just five years after he entered politics.
As Singaporeans debate the rather unusual appointment, the received wisdom is that the leadership's changing of the baton is causing concern as the previous changes have been so well-oiled and predictable.
Way before Lee Kuan Yew decided to step aside in 1990, the public knew that Goh Chok Tong would take over, and way before Goh even became PM in 2004, it was generally accepted that Lee's son, the current PM, would become PM No 3.
This kind of a smooth and predictable handover has been a Singapore hallmark which made the country a haven for investors and foreigners flocking to put in their money and sink roots here. Now, the next leader is not even in sight making this safe haven a little unpredictable, even a little vulnerable.
On many other fronts, Singapore is facing uncertain times. The economy is trudging along with no new ideas to push it forward, productivity is still lagging, an aging population and a lack of decisive measures to bring in foreign labor are frustrating employers, a muscular China and a clueless America are putting pressure on a leadership trying to read the tea leaves accurately. It is like a perfect storm coming together to wreak havoc on a country that has now to grapple with who will lead the country post-2021.
There is one bright spot, though. The leaders under Lee can still be relied upon to serve if the need arises. Lee will be 69 in 2021, Deputy Prime Ministers Teo Chee Hean, 66, and Tharman Shanmugaratnam, 64. The leadership can keep the gunpowder dry and draw on it if a rainy day approaches.











 
 
SINGAPORE: Singaporeans must be vigilant about any potential attempts by foreign parties to influence local politics and undermine the democratic process, said Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office Chan Chun Sing on Tuesday (Aug 1).

He was responding to questions in Parliament about whether elections in Singapore are vulnerable to foreign interference, particularly with the Presidential Election due in September.

Advertisement

“Foreign interference in domestic politics and electoral processes cannot be underestimated and must always be factored into our social and psychological defence,” said Mr Chan.

“History has shown that bigger and more powerful states will seek to advance their interests by projecting their influence on usually smaller or less organised ones via all instruments of power,” he added. “We cannot expect to be immune to such external forces.”

When asked by Workers’ Party MP Png Eng Huat on whether there have been any past incidents of foreign interference in the electoral process, Mr Chan said it “would not be convenient” for him to reveal details publicly due to the sensitive nature of the subject.

“We take it as a working assumption that every day, every moment, we must be careful of potential foreign interference in our processes … suffice to say that we will never let our guard down,” the minister added.

Advertisement

Mr Chan told the House that the threat is compounded by the pervasive use of the Internet and fake news, and urged Singaporeans to be more discerning in what they read or hear.

“It is critical for Singaporeans ourselves to recognise that foreign influence campaigns continue to exist … the integrity of our democratic process is the collective responsibility of all stakeholders and our electorate,” he said.

Mr Chan also laid out the measures Singapore has taken to guard against foreign influences. For instance, election laws prohibit foreigners from taking part in election activities and the Political Donations Act prevents election candidates and parties from accepting foreign funding.

Beyond the elections, the Public Order Act was also amended earlier this year to make clear that the police may refuse to grant permits for public assemblies organised by foreign entities and which are directed at advancing political causes.

There are also measures to protect Government networks and systems, said Mr Chan. “If these systems are compromised, they can be exploited to leak information or propagate fake news to disrupt election campaigns and shape voting patterns,” he warned.

“Ultimately, our best defence is a discerning electorate that recognises the realities of geopolitics and the world which we live in.”













Foreigners in S'pore told not to import politics
The Singapore Police Force has issued a warning against the importing of politics from other countries into the Republic, after learning of calls encouraging overseas Malaysians to support political activities in the lead-up to their country's upcoming general election.

The calls included those by Global Bersih, a coalition of Malaysian non-governmental organisations seeking to reform the country's electoral system.

"Foreigners visiting, working or living in Singapore should not use Singapore as a platform to further their political causes," the police said in a statement yesterday.


Foreigners are also reminded to abide by Singapore laws, including those regulating public assemblies.

The police said that under the Public Order Act, organising or participating in a public assembly without a police permit is illegal. Non-Singaporeans will also not be granted permits for assemblies used for political or electoral campaigns.

"Those who break the law will be dealt with firmly, and this may include termination of visas or work passes, where applicable," the police added.

The Malaysian Parliament is likely to be dissolved this week, as the House will sit for the final time for the 2013-2018 session today.

Singapore Police acted on several incidents during Malaysia's last general election in 2013. Then-Johor Menteri Besar Abdul Ghani Othman crossed the Second Link in a bus ahead of polling day on May 5 that year, and spent an hour meeting Malaysians and speaking to journalists in Jurong East, leading to suggestions that he was campaigning.

And following two protests linked to Bersih at Merlion Park on May 8 and May 11, police issued 74 conditional warnings to the participants under the Public Order Act.
