Taiwan's political earthquake: Does China gain from Tsai Ing-wen's losses?

Taiwan is often hit by earthquakes, but over the weekend it was shaken by a political one.

In a series of local elections, the ruling pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), which came to power in 2016 in a landslide victory, lost more than half the cities and counties it held and is left with only a handful.

The China-friendly former ruling party Kuomintang (KMT) made a dramatic comeback, winning 15 of the 22 cities and counties in Taiwan.

The result is a major upset for President Tsai Ing-wen, who has resigned as party leader, and could indicate a victory for the KMT in 2020's presidential and parliamentary elections.

China has leapt on the outcome, saying voters rejected Ms Tsai's "separatist stance". But the reality is not so straightforward.

Taiwanese prefer the middle ground
To the outside world, it seems like Taiwan faces one overwhelming choice - independence from or eventual unification with mainland China.

But surveys have consistently shown that Taiwanese people prefer not to have to choose between one or the other; instead they favour the middle ground.

While they believe their island is an independent country and would like it to be treated as such, most people don't believe formal independence is achievable any time soon and prefer not to have damaging relations with Beijing.

Taiwan voters reject same-sex marriage
The ruling party DPP lost so badly on Saturday because it framed the vote as one between freedom or a Chinese takeover.

And voters - more concerned about a struggling economy - didn't buy it.

Since the DPP came to power, the relationship with mainland China - which is becoming increasingly assertive - has significantly deteriorated.

Voters remembered that under the previous China-friendly administration, Taiwan enjoyed unprecedented good relations with China - without losing an inch in sovereignty, democracy and independence.

In fact it gained - by getting along with China, it was able to participate in many more international activities reserved for countries while also reaping the benefits of China's economic growth.

Second chance for the KMT?
The issue over Taiwan's sovereignty is a complicated unresolved remnant of history dating back more than a century and, to be fair, Chinese people have as much right to want unification as Taiwanese people do to want independence.

Taiwanese voters outside the fringe extremes want to focus on what the two sides can co-operate on and let time resolve this matter.

They know that China does not want to attack and has no timeline for reunification, and they are confident in Taiwan's democracy. That's why an overwhelming number of voters opted for the KMT's candidates.

Political controversy at 'Chinese Oscars'
Taiwan's last ally in Africa stands by it
They know the KMT can work with China and build peace between the two sides and that this would help the economy.

That's not to say they completely trust or even like the KMT. They are worried its pro-business and pro-unification stance could make the island too dependent on China economically and risk Beijing having too much influence over Taiwan's affairs.

But they'd rather give the KMT a second chance than continue on the current path of constant conflict with China and a potential war.

War of words
China has interpreted the voting results as a desire by the Taiwanese to work with the mainland for the joint prosperity of both sides.

A Chinese spokesman was quoted by the Xinhua news agency as saying the results "reflected the strong will of the Taiwanese public in sharing the benefits of the peaceful development across the Taiwan Strait, and desires to improve the island's economy and people's wellbeing".

He added the mainland will continue to "follow a path of peaceful development of cross-Strait relations."

A state-run newspaper had a stronger reaction.

"The election shows that the Tsai administration has betrayed Taiwan's interests and become a troublemaker whose actions have drifted farther away from the practical needs of the Taiwan people and the historical truth of the consensus there is only one China," said an editorial in state newspaper China Daily.

Taiwan's current government quickly warned China to not over-interpret the election results to its own benefit and reiterated its stance that the current state of relations is all China's fault.

The DPP is unlikely to change course and start cosying up to China.

How a coffee in LA sparked a diplomatic row
So unless it can bring about a dramatic (and unlikely) turnaround in Taiwan's economy it risks losing the 2020 presidential and legislative races, and tense relations can be expected in the short term.

One lesson that perhaps the KMT has learned and the DPP should learn is that if they push Taiwan toward a path that would lead to merging with China or potential conflict with the mainland, they risk losing elections.

A mother of two young boys told me outside a polling station that she supports neither independence nor unification, and she doesn't want war between the two sides; she just want more opportunities for Taiwanese people's lives to improve.

Like people around the world, the Taiwanese voted for peace and prosperity.













Foreign scholars urge Taiwan to counter China's threat

Washington, Jan. 8 (CNA) Forty-four international academics and former U.S. government officials on Tuesday issued a joint open letter to Taiwan's people to show support for President Tsai Ing-wen and urge Taiwanese across the political spectrum to understand and counter China's threat.

In the open letter, the writers expressed to Taiwan's people the sense of urgency they felt to maintain unity and continuity at a critical moment in Taiwan's history.

They said China had left no stone unturned in its attempts to squeeze Taiwan's international space over the past two years, threatening it with a buildup of military power, and making it appear as if Taiwan's only future lies in integration with an authoritarian China.

That culminated on Jan. 2 when Chinese President Xi Jinping said that unification under China's "one country, two systems" principle was the only option for the future, the letter said.

"We applaud the courageous stance of the Taiwanese people in resisting Chinese pressures and protecting their own democratic system," the letter said.

"But we express our concerns that Beijing's latest subversive techniques of deception and disinformation could sow division and confusion in Taiwan's body politic and create the kind of civil unrest that Beijing lists as one of the pretexts for using force against Taiwan -- which would nevertheless constitute aggression in violation of the United Nations Charter."

The authors of the letter said they understood that Taiwan has domestic issues to address, the hoped democratic processes proceed in a way that does not detract from national unity "in the face of the larger threat to Taiwan's existence as a free and democratic nation."

If Taiwanese across the political spectrum fail to understand this threat, and go on with business as usual, this provides Beijing's repressive leaders with an opportunity to divide Taiwanese society, and increasingly make it an inevitability that Taiwan is incorporated into China, the letter argued.

The letter backed Tsai's recent approach to China, including the rejection of "one country, two systems" and the "1992 consensus" highlighted by Xi in his speech.

It also supported her "Taiwan consensus" based on the "four musts" mentioned in a New Year's Day speech.

The four musts are that China must accept the reality of the existence of the Republic of China (Taiwan), respect the commitment of the 23 million people of Taiwan to freedom and democracy, resolve cross-strait differences peacefully and equitably, and negotiate with Taiwan's government or an organization with a government mandate.

"We thus appeal to the people of Taiwan to maintain a clear vision for their future as a free and democratic nation that is a full and equal member in the international family of nations.

"It is essential to maintain unity and to be supportive of a democratically elected President who has demonstrated balance, flexibility, and toughness," the letter said.

The authors of the letter also urged their own governments to make clear to Beijing that Taiwan does not stand alone.

Among those that signed the letter were John Tkacik, the director of the Future Asia Project at the International Assessment and Strategy Center in Alexandria, Virginia and a retired U.S. foreign service officer; William Stanton and Stephen Young, former directors of the Taipei Office of the American Institute in Taiwan; and Jerome Cohen, a professor of law at New York University Law School and an expert in Chinese law. 


















Taiwan, the place to be a woman in politics

On Friday, Tsai Ing-wen became Taiwan's first female president.

It has never been a burning ambition of the cat-loving former law professor to be president, and she is virtually unique among East Asia's female leaders.

Unlike South Korea's President Park Geun-hye and the Philippines' former President Corazon Aquino, Thailand's former PM Yingluck Shinawatra, she does not follow a father, brother or husband who was in a position of power.

That is not unusual in Taiwan.

Many of Taiwan's female politicians, including former Vice-President Annette Lu, Kaohsiung City Mayor Chen Chu, and chair of the Kuomintang party Hung Hsiu-chu, rose to powerful positions without having come from a political family. They have largely made it on their own.

Women also shine in Taiwan's parliament. The island's women legislators are even seen leading the charge in Taiwan's infamous parliament scuffles.

Following January elections, it now has a record percentage of women legislators at 38%, putting Taiwan far ahead of Asian countries, the international average of 22%, and most nations, including the UK, Germany, and the US.

So why are only four of Ms Tsai's 40 cabinet members women?

The cabinet spokesman blamed it on a dearth of experienced women in her party because it has been out of power for so many years and on the fact that women were elected to other posts. But he did admit that some women had turned down the offer of a job at the top table.
One of them, 65-year-old Ho Mei-yueh, a former economics minister, told me she had devoted 33 years of her life to government, putting her own needs second while also raising a family. She just wants some time to herself now. It's the perennial question of a work-life balance for many women.

"I had to work and look after the kids. The only person I could neglect was myself," said Ms Ho. "Would a man my age turn down the offer? Men, when they are young, they don't have to give so much of themselves, because the burden of taking care of the children does not fall on them. To many men, their job is their life."

Still, it is so natural in Taiwan to see women in politics that little fuss has been made about Ms Tsai's gender.

But take a closer look and it's clear that quotas are behind the relatively high percentages of Taiwanese women in politics. They stipulate that women must get half the "at-large" seats in the legislature and one out of every four seats in electoral districts in local council elections.

"It's in the constitution that there should be special positions for women. Only Scandinavian countries have adopted similar policies. It's certainly unique in Asia and other parts of the world," said Joyce Gelb, a New York-based professor, who has studied Taiwanese women's participation in politics.

What has also helped was a commitment to women's representation even in the early decades of the Republic of China's existence, a history of women's activism, as well as a society with many highly educated and professional women able to take up positions of leadership, scholars say.

Over the years, the number of women legislators has far exceeded the quota, leading some to argue it's no longer needed.

But Ms Tsai's inability to put more women in her cabinet shows quotas are still useful to balance the scale. In elections without quotas such as for city mayors or county magistrates the percentage of women elected is only around 15%. Far fewer women run in elections compared to men.

"When it's a one-to-one race, men still tend to fare better because of their prior experience and personal connections..We still do not sufficiently nurture women to go into politics and government," said Chen Man-li, the director of an alliance of women's groups and newly-elected lawmaker.



Women's groups say there is no doubt having women politicians makes a difference; it's easier to pass laws favourable to women, including on maternity leave and childcare.

Nathan Batto, a Taipei-based Academia Sinica scholar who has studied women's participation in politics, says that with quotas political parties pay more attention to grooming female politicians.

But still the greater challenge is changing society's views to make it easier for women to enter and crucially to stay in politics and that goes back to work-life balance.

"Women have a lot of obstacles in their way that men don't in developing their political careers," said Mr Batto. "They have to have their family and spouse's support. The approval of your spouse is usually more automatic for men than women."

Taiwan is leagues ahead of other places, but it's worth noting that none of the top four female political figures in Taiwan are married or have children.














Chanting slogans like “Taiwan is Taiwan” and “We are an independent country,” thousands took to the streets in Taipei over the weekend to demand outright independence from China.  

It was the first such rally since President Tsai Ing-wen of the traditionally pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) took power in 2016.

Formosa Alliance, a pro-independence political group founded in April, said more than 120,000 participated in the Saturday demonstration. Police put the number at a much smaller 6,000.

Still, the idea of Taiwan independence is unacceptable to China. In fact, over the past few months, the Chinese government has been aggressively lobbying global companies, including airlines, to remove any references to Taiwan as a country or region separate from China.

At the rally, some protesters held up cardboards that said, “No more bullying,” an apparent reference to China’s effort to erase Taiwan’s international identity.

Taiwan is a democratic, self-ruled island with its own government, military and currency. Why is outright independence such a worry for China? And do Taiwanese really support it? How much of a potential problem is this for the US?

Here’s what you need to know.

Taiwan has its own laws and military. 
Taiwan has its own laws and military. Photo: Reuters/Tyrone Siu
What is Taiwan’s status?

Taiwan is certainly a self-governing island. It has been so since 1949, when the losers of the bloody Chinese civil war, the Kuomintang or KMT (also known as the Nationalist Party of China), fled the Chinese mainland and settled on the island.

For decades, the ruling KMT maintained that it was the legitimate ruler of all of China. And it was recognized as such by pretty much everyone, including the US and the United Nations.

But, in 1972, President Richard Nixon resumed relations with Communist Party-led China. That’s when the country’s famously ambiguous “one-China policy” was devised.

The US acknowledged that “all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China.” At the same time, the US did not specify whether Beijing or Taipei should be the legitimate government.

The US ditched formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan in favor of China in 1979, although Washington remains the island’s main ally and the two sides work together unofficially.

The “one-China policy,” though, created a deliberate “strategic ambiguity” that allowed both Taiwan and mainland China to flourish economically. And it is the source of the “status quo” that keeps the peace today.

China has been ramping up its pressure on Taiwan both diplomatically and economically since Tsai Ing-wen became president of Taiwan in 2016. 
China has been ramping up its pressure on Taiwan both diplomatically and economically since Tsai Ing-wen became president of Taiwan in 2016. Photo: AP/Vincent Yu
What exactly, then, is Taiwan independence?

There are different views on this.

The Formosa Alliance, which organized the weekend demonstration has been calling for an official, binding referendum to decide if Taiwan should declare outright independence.

It would mean changing the island’s official name to Taiwan, instead of the Republic of China, and joining the United Nations as a full member. Taiwan is currently not a member of the United Nations.

How would China react?

The Chinese government tolerates the current situation. But it has often said Taiwan is an inalienable part of China and that eventual unification must be achieved, with force if necessary.

Protesters on Saturday said China had been bullying Taiwan and Taiwanese people wanted to control their fate. 
Protesters on Saturday said China had been bullying Taiwan and Taiwanese people wanted to control their fate. Photo: AP/Chiang Ying Ying
Do Taiwanese support independence?

Only a minority of Taiwanese want to achieve independence as soon as possible, according to the National Chengchi University of Taiwan, which has been conducting opinion polls on the subject since 1994.

Its most recent poll in June found 4.8% of respondents supported immediate independence.

“The rally was one single event where some people expressed their opinion, but it doesn’t mean the majority of Taiwanese people support independence,” Liu Fu-kuo of the National Chengchi University told Inkstone.

An overwhelming majority of the respondents said they preferred keeping the status quo for now, but their preferences for the future of Taiwan differed.

"America will always believe Taiwan’s embrace of democracy shows a better path for all the Chinese people," said Mike Pence during a speech in early October. 
"America will always believe Taiwan’s embrace of democracy shows a better path for all the Chinese people," said Mike Pence during a speech in early October. Photo: AFP/Jim Watson
What does the US thinking about this?

Fan Shih-ping, a political scientist with National Taiwan Normal University, said declaring outright independence was a risky move.

“It is questionable if the US would support Taiwan independence. And it’s guaranteed that China would strongly oppose it and might even send troops,” he said.

“We haven’t seen the US being so supportive of Taiwan since 1979, and even Vice President Mike Pence supported Taiwan publicly, calling it a symbol of democracy for the Chinese people."

Declaring independence would not only anger China, it may also alienate the US, which is Taiwan’s biggest supporter.


















Taiwan's President: Fighting for Reform

President Tsai seeks to move Taiwan into a broader, more constructive role in the Indo-Pacific region.

resident Tsai Ing-wen is a sophisticated, professional woman with a strong resume: lawyer, World Trade Organization negotiator, Mainland Affairs Council chair, legislator, vice premier, Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) chair. Organization negotiators will tell you that her attention to detail was stunning and she carries that characteristic today as president.

Tsai came into office understanding the challenges facing the nation and set out to meet them with all the attention to detail she pursued as a World Trade Organization negotiator.

First item: Taiwan’s government pension plans were teetering on the edge of bankruptcy. The need for reform was desperate. Cutting payments has never been easy, but going to zero was a real possibility if nothing were done. So the president and the DPP legislature moved to address the issue. In a recent blog in the National Interest, Kwei-Bo Huang called this reform “rude.” Real “rudeness” would have been to do nothing and leave pensioners high and dry.

Also “rude” states Huang was the Tsai government’s move to implement “transitional justice”—dealing with past state sponsored human-rights violations. The law’s objectives include truth seeking, compensation for victims, and bringing about social reconciliation.

The Kuomintang (KMT) kept Taiwan under severe martial law for thirty-eight years. Thousands were jailed or executed for pursuing democratic reforms and human rights. The record clearly shows the brutal authoritarian rule of the Chiangs, yet Huang whines that “no clear definition of ‘authoritarian’” is in play and the DPP has gone too far as it seeks to remove public symbols of the authoritarian past, read statues of Chiang Kai-shek, and deal with assets stolen from state coffers and individual citizens.

While the Labor Standards Act has stirred up intense debate in Taiwan, revisions have been made based on input from a wide cross section of labor and business leaders, and the government stands ready to listen and amend the law as needed. Balancing demands and moving to compromise is the name of the game in governance and President Tsai knows this full well.

The president’s 5+2 major economic development programs are designed to meet the serious issues of wage stagnation and the widening wealth gap by providing new opportunities in industries across the board as well as in agriculture.
The DPP government understands the need for a secure energy supply and reduction of carbon pollution. There are plans underway to bring renewable energy up to 20 percent of Taiwan’s supply by 2025, to add LNG into the energy mix and to get serious about conservation measures. While sectors of the business community might feel “unease” over the energy supply, as Huang indicates, the greater sense of unease that permeates the body politic is the dangers inherent in nuclear power plants sitting on earthquake faults. The nightmare images of the Fukushima disaster haunt Taiwan’s citizens and a nuclear-free homeland is their dream. Getting there demands Tsai’s attention to detail—and gets it.

With the KMT in power for fifty years, the bulk of government funding was concentrated in the KMT’s northern Taiwan base. The Forward-looking Infrastructure Development Program that Huang laments is designed to balance development throughout the island. This economic stimulus project includes investment in rail transportation, water environment, urban and rural development, digital development and green energy.

 
Huang shows his true-blue colors when he blames President Tsai’s “nonchalance” for the current state of cross-strait relations. All was well, Huang insinuates, when the KMT bowed to the 1992 Consensus, but now all is lost because Tsai refuses to kneel. Ginned up by the KMT’s Su Chi in 2000, this consensus was a “convenient fiction” that claimed both the PRC and the ROC agreed there was “one China” but that each had their “own interpretation.” One small problem, however, is that the PRC side has never agreed to the “different interpretations” part of the equation. There is one China and the PRC is it. There is no way President Tsai, a democratically elected official of the sovereign entity known as the Republic of China, can agree to being a minion of the PRC.

So, yes, the PRC has cut off all official exchanges with Taiwan, cut down the number of Chinese tourists, flown its aircraft around the island and floats its aircraft carrier around Taiwan’s periphery. And that is Tsai’s fault for not kowtowing? President Tsai has gone out of her way to not be provocative and to call for dialogue with China. She has been rigorous about maintaining the status quo across the strait—with Taiwan’s democratic way of life preserved. She has been rebuffed through no fault of her own. The shoe, Dr. Huang, is on the Chinese foot.

 
A final note: the New Southbound Policy is not a tactic to con the Taiwan public away from cross-strait issues. Rather it is a detailed policy of integrating Taiwan into the wider Asian region through cultural, education, economic and political links.

Dr. Huang and the KMT continue to look longingly to China. President Tsai’s vision is much wider, seeking to move Taiwan into a broader, more constructive role in the Indo-Pacific region. Don’t underestimate her.

