Foreign-born candidates discuss challenges and prejudice on the Tokyo campaign trail
In a nation where there are few foreign-born politicians in local assemblies or in the Diet, the sight of a candidate openly touting his or her foreign background through loudspeakers on the campaign trail can come as a surprise.

Reactions to their candidacy vary — from welcoming to incredulous to downright hostile.

But like it or not, as Japanese society has become increasingly diverse over the years as the nation brings in more foreign workers through various channels, “there will be more and more candidates with non-Japanese backgrounds in the future,” said Atsushi Kondo, a professor of immigration policy studies at Meijo University.

Debates over whether to allow foreign participation in politics have traditionally revolved around Korean residents who came to the country during Japan’s colonial rule over the Korean Peninsula between 1910 to 1945 and their descendants, who have special residency visas.

“We’re now entering an age where the issue concerns a wider range of nationalities, from Brazilians to Chinese and Indians to Vietnamese and Filipinos,” Kondo noted.

The Japan Times recently interviewed three Japanese of foreign descent about the joys and challenges they faced as they ran in quadrennial local assembly polls in Tokyo held Sunday.
Puranik Yogendra: Edogawa
Puranik Yogendra, 41, became the first assemblyman of Indian descent in Edogawa Ward on Sunday, having finished an impressive fifth out of 58 candidates on the ballot. Of the 226,561 valid ballots cast, Yogendra — backed by the main opposition Constitutional Democratic Party of Japan — bagged 6,477 votes.

The former banker and single father of a 16-year-old lives in the Nishikasai neighborhood, which is home to a large population of Indian residents. Yogendra, who goes by the nickname “Yogi,” became a naturalized Japanese citizen in 2012.

Yogi’s interest in politics was piqued several years ago when he got wind of Edogawa Ward’s plan to build a “Little India” in Nishikasai — complete with a Hindu temple, Indian restaurants and even a hospital catering exclusively to Indian residents, he said. But ward officials, Yogi claims, seemed blissfully unaware that the creation of such a designated area could result in the area’s Indian residents becoming alienated from the larger Japanese community.

“Indians here don’t want a new hospital of their own. … They already have a huge facility called Tokyo Rinkai Hospital in their area and they would rather have budgets set aside for the greater availability of English-speaking doctors or nurses there so they can use the facility more conveniently,” said Yogi, who has lived in Japan for 20 years.

“Given more foreigners will be coming in and municipal services for them are coming up short, we do need a project of some kind. But whatever reforms we carry out, we have to do so the right way. Otherwise it’s a waste of money.”

In the final days of his campaigning, local schoolchildren, mothers and his compatriots sometimes walked up to him or stopped to chat with him as a way to show their support. But that doesn’t mean he’s always had it easy.

“Some voters have said to me things like, ‘Who the hell are you? Go back to your country!'” he said of his experience on the campaign trail.

“But if you want to become a politician, you can’t take these words personally. You have to accept that there are people who think like this in society and get on with it. You’re the one who needs to be the adult here.”

Few know more about the difficulty of running in a Japanese election as a foreign-born candidate as Lee Komaki, a naturalized Japanese citizen of Chinese descent who, for the second time, failed to win a seat in the Shinjuku Ward Assembly in Sunday’s poll.

Lee, 58, who ran as an independent, garnered 1,036 votes in the race, nearly unchanged from his previous total of 1,018 in 2015.

Having arrived in Japan in 1988 as an exchange student, Lee, born Lee Xiaomu, recalls having to battle deep-rooted prejudice against his non-Japanese origins throughout the campaign, with some voters frowning at the mere mention of China.

“They notice I’m from China, and immediately lump me together with other Chinese people or even the Chinese Communist Party,” he said.

He recalled one instance where a Japanese woman who came across him while he was stumping launched into a tirade about how loud and ill-mannered her Chinese neighbors were before walking away without so much as accepting one of his flyers.

And on the internet, some vilified him as a “spy” of the CCP, he said.

“Not only I, myself, but ordinary Chinese citizens are different from the CCP. If anything, they’re the victims of a dictatorship and undemocratic system led by the CCP. But some people don’t make that distinction.”

In Shinjuku, Lee is best known as “the Kabukicho guide,” having authored books and starred in a documentary featuring decades of his experience navigating his way through the chaos of the notorious red-light district that is synonymous with nightclubs, sex businesses and yakuza.

He uses this background to bill himself as a “voice for a minority,” pledging to improve the social status of nightclub employees, strippers and foreign laborers who, he says, are prone to unfounded prejudice.

In Shinjuku Ward — home to some 42,000 non-Japanese residents, the largest concentration among Tokyo’s 23 wards — Lee considers himself a “bridge” between the foreign and Japanese communities, too.

“Foreigners don’t have the right to vote, so that’s where I step in to represent their voices,” he said.

Noemi Inoue, 57, an assemblywoman in Sumida Ward, burst into laughter when she recalled one of the highlights of the early part of her career as a Bolivian-born politician in Japan.

Inoue was attending a gathering with local residents when a Japanese woman came up to her and pointed at a badge she was wearing — which confirmed she was an assembly member — before asking, in a somewhat perplexed tone, “Excuse me, these badges are for politicians.”

“Yeah, I know, because I’m a politician,” Inoue replied, much to the disbelief of the woman, who she says is now “my No. 1 supporter.”

“When I became a politician, everybody was so surprised,” Inoue said in English. “Many people see me and couldn’t believe I have won” an election.

On Sunday, Inoue, a former economist at Bolivia’s central bank and the United Nations who came to Japan in 1995, finished third with 4,225 votes, assuring her of a third term in office.

Her forays into politics years after her arrival were in part inspired by her dismay at what she considered the lack of gender equality in Japan, including major hurdles for women looking to rejoin the workforce after having children. A shortage of day care centers and the pervasive mindset that men should go out to work while women stay at home to take care of domestic affairs are not helping either, she says.

“Even in Bolivia, which is a developing country … women and men are equal. They have (the) same rights, same opportunities, same salaries. In Japan, I couldn’t see that,” she said.

With Japan now transitioning toward a more diverse society with the launch of a new visa system and other societal changes, Inoue says more foreign-born politicians like herself are needed.

“The number of international marriages is increasing. Many people who come for business or work are increasing, as well as tourists. So we really need to have a multicultural and multilingual society,” she said. “I think more foreigners should become politicians.”

There is a way, she says, that foreign residents can get involved in Japanese politics without becoming naturalized.

“Foreigners can (reach out) to their local politicians and they can talk to them — and if they don’t speak Japanese they can find a friend and they can (express) to local politicians their concerns, their worries, all the problems they have,” she said.

Local politicians “are there to help everybody,” she added.

Growing Russian-Japanese cooperation meets bilateral interests, Putin says

MOSCOW, May 1. /TASS/. Russian President Vladimir Putin has sent a telegram congratulating new Japanese Emperor Naruhito on his inauguration, the Kremlin website said on Wednesday.

"In recent years, relations between our countries have been significantly developing. Moscow and Tokyo hold a constructive political dialogue, cooperating in solving topical issues of regional and global agenda. I’m sure that further boosting of Russian-Japanese cooperation in various areas meets core interests of our peoples and is in the framework of strengthening international stability and security," the telegram says.

The Russian president wished the Japanese emperor good health, prosperity and successful years-long rule for the benefit of Japanese citizens.

Japanese Crown Prince Naruhito officially became the country’s new emperor on Wednesday. In accordance with the law on his father Akihito’s abdication, this took place at 00:00 Tokyo time on May 1. At the same time, Japan has welcomed the first year of the era of Reiwa, or "beautiful harmony", which marks the rule of every new emperor.

On Tuesday, official events in honor of his father, 85-year-old Akihito, were held in Tokyo. On his abdication, Akihito received the title of honorable emperor. Akihito announced his wish to step down back in 2016 due to his old age. Under Japan’s law, the monarch rules for life, but the parliament passed a law making a one-off exception for Akihito.

Naruhito, 59, is the first Japanese emperor born after Japan’s capitulation in the Second World War. He graduated from Tokyo’s prestigious Gakushuin University and the University of Oxford. Naruhito’s wife, 55-year-old Masako, the daughter of a famous Japanese diplomat, is a graduate of Harvard and the University of Tokyo and a career diplomat. The imperial couple has one daughter Aiko, born in 2001.

Cosplaying eccentric Mac Akasaka of the Smile Party snags seat in Tokyo ward assembly

He clambers out from under the table, wearing a pink Hooter’s tank top while sporting fluffy angel wings and a halo, before bowing deeply toward the camera and taking a seat.

“People of Tokyo — have you been smiling lately!?” he says suddenly, breaking into a wide grin and striking a pose.

This is Makoto Tonami, 70, better known as Mac Akasaka of the Smile Party, at a campaign broadcast shown on public broadcaster NHK ahead of the 2014 Tokyo gubernatorial election.

Mac Akasaka
Mac Akasaka | KYODO
On Sunday, after years of campaigning in national and local elections, Akasaka finally won an assembly seat on the assembly for Minato Ward in Tokyo.

Akasaka is known for his eccentric campaign broadcasts that have captured viral attention, in which he has dressed up as a variety of colorful characters — including Mohandas Gandhi, an angel and “Superman” — all while promising to bring smiles to people’s faces through his policies.

The campaign broadcasts are punctuated with his signature calls for people to “smile!”

“Smile therapy is my lifework,” said Akasaka during an interview with the Japan Times after the Tokyo gubernatorial race in 2012.

In his manifesto for this year’s vote, his campaign promises included tripling the number of elderly care facilities as well as paying a monthly allowance of ¥30,000 to Minato residents aged 65 and over, as well as young people who have not yet completed their final year of junior high school.

Mac Akasaka (second from left) walks in the Nanba district of Osaka in March 2014 to support Toru Hashimoto, who was running in the Osaka mayoral election.
Mac Akasaka (second from left) walks in the Nanba district of Osaka in March 2014 to support Toru Hashimoto, who was running in the Osaka mayoral election. | KYODO
Responses to Akasaka’s win have been varied, with some taking to Twitter to post stills from Akasaka’s past election broadcasts and congratulating him on his win while one Twitter user, going by the handle @mtkfmtkf, jokingly tweeted “This guy really won a seat? Minato residents — what are you even thinking.”

Despite the goofy costumes and his eccentric campaign speeches, Akasaka graduated from the prestigious Kyoto University before working at major trading company Itochu Corp. for over 20 years according to his website. After his stint at Itochu, he set up his own trading business specializing in rare metals — experience he has promised he would apply to his career as a politician.

Debate over colonial-era Japanese buildings flares in South Korea

SEOUL -- Mokpo, a sleepy port city in southwestern South Jeolla Province, has found itself at the center of a national debate in South Korea over history and identity. Reports emerged in January that Sohn Hye-won, a politician from the ruling Democratic Party of Korea, made a "bulk purchase" of Japanese-style houses in the city.

There is disagreement over what to do with such buildings. Japan annexed the Korean Peninsula in 1910, ruling it as a colony until 1945. South Korea recently marked the 100th anniversary of the founding in Shanghai of the Korean Provisional Government, the country's government in exile, but the significance of Japanese architecture from that era and the question of what to do with it remain unresolved.

It is a sensitive issue at a time when relations between South Korea and Japan have once again grown chilly. South Korean courts have ordered Japanese companies to pay compensation to people who toiled in their factories during the war, but Tokyo says these claims were settled when the two countries normalized relations in 1965. Later, the South Korean National Assembly speaker said that the Japanese Emperor should apologize, then compared Japan to a "brazen thief" after Tokyo demanded that he apologize for the remarks.

Japanese assets that fell into local hands after World War II are called "enemy property" in South Korea. Some people want to conserve these assets, saying they memorialize the country's painful history. Others describe them as the remnants of Japanese imperialism and want them destroyed.

Mokpo prospered as a shipping port for rice, cotton and salt during Japanese rule. The city's historic districts still retain the character of that time. The city received a special designation from South Korea's Cultural Heritage Administration for its cultural and historical significance in August 2018.

Sohn is suspected of having her relatives and acquaintances buy the Japanese houses with the expectation that their value would rise due to the designation. She denies the allegation, and says the purchase was "to preserve the landscape."

Property prices around the Japanese houses have doubled since the scandal erupted, according to a local real estate agent. It has also served as a publicity campaign for Mokpo. People are flocking to the city for a firsthand look.

"The number of tourists visiting here during the weekend has doubled, or tripled," said Park Sung, a researcher at the Mokpo Culture Center. The last time the city saw this much attention was when former President Kim Dae-jung, who was from the area, entered politics in the 1960s, Park added.

The flood of visitors is partly by design. Mokpo's designation is part of a program designed to preserve areas with modern cultural assets, rather than individual buildings. Cities can then use those areas as a resource for urban development.

In addition to Mokpo, the heritage authority designated Japanese houses in Gunsan and Yeongju as significant last year. It plans to name five more locations this year. There is an irony in using the vestiges of Japan's colonial rule as tourist attractions, but regional cities, many of which have been battered economically, are often eager for the additional cash.

"If Mokpo is to generate revenue, tourism is the only way," said the Mokpo Culture Center's Park. "I'm waiting for the day when relations between South Korea and Japan improve, and a lot of Japanese tourists come here."

The fates of prewar Japanese buildings have varied. The building that housed the government during Japanese rule was demolished in 1995 under President Kim Young-sam, but other prewar buildings still stand. Among them are the Old Seoul Station building, formerly called Gyeongseong Station, and the former Seoul City Hall.

President Moon Jae-in's administration has opposed preserving colonial-era buildings, and he has advocated the "liquidation of pro-Japanese remnants." The administration pushed that slogan during the 100th anniversary of the formation of the Korean government-in-exile and the The March 1 Movement, a protest against against Japanese rule that also took place in 1919.

Messages objecting to the preservation of prewar Japanese houses have been posted on the public petition board of the South Korean Presidential Office website.

"Halt the restoration of 'enemy property' houses by pro-Japanese people," one reads. "Cancel the designation of Japanese houses as cultural assets," says another.

On the 100th anniversary of the March 1 Movement, the Gyeongsangnam-do Office of Education removed a large juniper tree from its front yard, describing it as a "symbol of colonial rule." It was replaced with a pine tree indigenous to South Korea.

The office said that it took the step to "instill the correct view of history in students."

But those who want to uproot the colonial-era landscape have not prevailed entirely.

In Jinhae, a district in the city of Changwon, cherry trees planted by Japanese during the colonial era were once cut down, but new trees were later planted in the same spot. Jinhae now boasts 360,000 cherry trees and attracts many visitors as South Korea's best cherry-blossom viewing spot. Prewar Japanese houses in Jinhae still serve as cafes and restaurants.

‘Stopping the bad stuff’: Japan’s Abe visits White House in latest bid to soothe Trump’s ego — and avoid his ire

Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe arrives in Washington on Friday for a two-day summit with President Trump that includes meetings at the White House, a private birthday dinner for the first lady and 18 holes at Trump National Golf Club in Sterling.

Such ample face time has been viewed in Tokyo as a symbol of success in Abe’s diligent 2 1/2-year effort to fan the mercurial president’s ego. It also has left other foreign capitals, including Seoul, with a touch of envy in the contest to influence a foreign policy that often appears to be driven by Trump’s whims.

But beyond the pleasantries lies a more difficult reality for Abe and a test of his resilience at a time when Trump is demanding that Japan engage in negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement that Tokyo has long resisted, and is ratcheting up threats to impose tariffs on Japanese automobiles.

Such an action “could be a turning point” in the relationship, one Japanese official said this week, before quickly adding that he does not believe it will happen.

That mounting tensions on trade threaten to overshadow the uncertainty for Japan over the fate of the Trump administration’s stalled nuclear negotiations with North Korea illustrates the complex and challenging path forward for Abe even as he reaffirms his charm offensive. His White House visit will mark the 40th time he has spoken or met with Trump since the president won office.

“There’s a certain amount of domestic dismay and criticism of Abe for what is perceived in many quarters in Japan as shameless pandering to Donald Trump,” said Daniel Russel, who served as assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific in the Obama administration. “I’ve certainly heard that from [legislative] Diet members in Abe’s own party. But my suspicion is that Abe feels justified based on the principle of, ‘whatever it takes’ — that Japan does not have the luxury of being cast adrift in this uncongenial geopolitical climate.”

Japanese officials emphasized that Abe’s visit is part of a multination tour that includes stops in France, Italy, Slovakia, Belgium and Canada — an itinerary aimed at shoring up the agenda for the Group of 20 summit in Osaka in June. Trump, who will make a three-day state visit to Tokyo to meet the new Japanese emperor in late May, is tentatively scheduled to attend the G-20, as well.

Yet analysts said that Abe also felt pressure to hastily secure an audience with Trump after the collapse of Trump’s summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in Hanoi in February. South Korean President Moon Jae-in, who has staked his presidency on diplomatic outreach to the North, visited two weeks ago to urge the White House to consider moving off a hard line over sanctions relief in a bid to restart talks.

But Abe will attempt to reinforce the position of Trump administration hard-liners, such as national security adviser John Bolton, that the president should hold firm on sanctions until Pyongyang fully commits to denuclearize, Japanese officials said.

“Abe has talked to Trump about North Korea before every summit, and the Japanese side says they have the same discussion every time,” said Michael Green, an analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies who served on the National Security Council in the George W. Bush Administration.

“Trump’s view is that he knows how to negotiate and doesn’t need Abe’s advice. I’m told Trump told Abe that it’s bad to prepare too much because on big deals you have to go with your gut,” Green added. But Abe’s goal “is at least stopping the bad stuff.”

White House officials offered a three-minute summary of the agenda for the summit in a telephone briefing for reporters Thursday but declined to answer questions.

Unlike the leaders of European allies, such as Germany and Britain, and U.S. neighbors Canada and Mexico, which have occasionally bucked Trump and paid a price on Twitter, Abe has remained loyal and gone largely unscathed from personal attacks.


But Trump on occasion has embarrassed Abe, such as when he announced at a Rose Garden news conference that the Japanese leader had written a five-page letter nominating him for a Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts on North Korea. Abe did not deny it and was mocked by some conservatives in Tokyo.

A Japanese official, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss private views in Tokyo, said Abe has not paid a significant political price for his efforts to woo Trump. Tokyo has been pleased with the administration’s tougher stance with Beijing on economic issues, and Abe believes Trump is listening on North Korea.

Yet the Japanese official acknowledged that Trump, embroiled in the fallout of the special counsel probe into Russian election interference, “faces a lot of challenges to get reelected. The president will do anything to get elected, so we have to be realistic.”


It is on trade where the Japanese are most circumspect. Burned once by Trump, who included Japan in a round of steel and aluminum tariffs early in his administration, the Japanese have engaged in a delicate dance of trying to demonstrate a willingness to negotiate while seeking to avoid the most challenging sticking points.

Toshimitsu Motegi, Japan’s economy minister, arrived in Washington on Thursday to resume trade talks with U.S. Trade Representative Robert E. Lighthizer. Their second meeting this month, the discussions are aimed at accelerating progress toward a limited deal involving agriculture and autos, with additional provisions on digital trade deferred to subsequent bargaining.

Trump wants to reduce the $67.6 billion annual merchandise trade deficit with Japan by getting Japanese automakers to produce more vehicles in the United States and by prying open Japan’s agricultural markets.


Abe insists he won’t give the U.S. any greater agricultural concessions than Japan agreed to in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a 12-nation trade accord that was awaiting ratification before Trump ended U.S. participation during his first week in office.

The talks are shadowed by Trump’s threat to impose tariffs on imported vehicles on national security grounds, which would hit Japan and Germany especially hard. The president agreed last fall to hold off on tariffs while the talks continue.

Abe, whose Liberal Democratic Party faces challenging upper house elections in Japan’s parliament this summer, is eager to avoid a blowup with Trump. Yet he appears to have little leverage to force concessions from the United States on trade that could help him win ratification in Tokyo for any potential deal.

“My sense is that the Japanese are hanging on by their fingernails,” said a congressional aide, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss private conversations.

The aide, who recently visited Tokyo, said one senior adviser to Abe told him of Trump: “If this goes on for another six years, we can’t survive.”