Vietnam Wants Western Politicians, Not Western Politics
As Hanoi welcomes Trump, it shuts down a key reformist think tank.
As the orange man meets the rocket man this week, the venue is also drawing attention. Vietnam, the host for U.S. President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un’s second meeting, is being held out as a model for North Korea to follow. The message will be: Embrace the free market, make friends with the United States, and investment and economic growth will flow in your direction. But Vietnam is currently giving the world a reminder that, fundamentally, it remains a communist state.

In what appears to be another backward step for intellectual freedom in the country, a leading academic foundation has been obliged to close down. It’s the latest episode in a dispute that began with a campaign against the translation of books by Western political theorists. The ruling Vietnam Communist Party seems to have doubled down in its campaign against ideas “contrary to the views and policies of the Party and State.”

On Feb. 20, the president of the country’s leading independent-minded organization, the Phan Chau Trinh Culture Foundation issued a public letter saying the association was closing “due to objective circumstances.” The nature of those circumstances has not yet been made clear, but the trail of evidence points toward pressure from the top. Several key figures linked to the foundation have recently been embroiled in a public dispute with the Communist Party leadership.

The closure appears to be the latest stage in a campaign by the Communist Party general secretary, Nguyen Phu Trong, to reimpose political orthodoxy after a decade of loosening control. In October 2018, Trong also became the country’s president, a dual role that has not been seen in Vietnam for half a century. In a parallel initiative to that seen in China, Trong and his supporters have been using a so-called anti-corruption campaign to eliminate their political opponents and reassert the power of the party bureaucracy.

The Phan Chau Trinh Culture Foundation was established in 2007 to encourage the exchange of ideas between Vietnam and the rest of the world. It is named after an early 20th century nationalist intellectual who established a free school to bring new ideas into the country and shake off French colonialism. The foundation’s president is Phan Chau Trinh’s granddaughter, Nguyen Thi Binh, a war hero and former vice president of Vietnam. She is now in her early 90s and looking to step down.

According to Tran Vi, the editor in chief of the dissident online magazine the Vietnamese, the foundation was unable to agree on a replacement with the Communist authorities. By law, all Vietnamese organizations—from local sports clubs to national churches—have to be registered with either a government or Communist Party supervisory organization. The Phan Chau Trinh Culture Foundation was under the supervision of the Vietnam Union of Science and Technology Associations which is, in turn, supervised by the Ministry of Science and Technology. The science union has a record of allowing more outspoken organizations to shelter under its umbrella. However, in this case its umbrella does not seem to have been strong enough to resist the storm from above.

The energy behind the Phan Chau Trinh Culture Foundation comes from a well-known writer, Nguyen Ngoc. In October 2018, in a rare and surprising move, Ngoc announced that he had resigned from the Communist Party because of its treatment of another leading intellectual, Chu Hao. Chu Hao had also resigned from the party after being disciplined for allowing his Knowledge Publishing House to issue books the party said were “politically and ideologically wrong.” Among the titles the Central Inspection Commission objected to were several standard European works of political philosophy including books by John Stuart Mill, John Locke, Alexis de Tocqueville, and Friedrich Hayek.

According to the Vietnamese’s Tran Vi, Nguyen Ngoc and Chu Hao were the two leading candidates to replace Binh as the Phan Chau Trinh Culture Foundation’s president. However, “given what happened last year, regarding them leaving the party, it is almost impossible for the government to approve either one to be the new leader, leading to the closure.” Although Ngoc and Hao were members of the Communist Party, they were also critics of many of its policies. In December 2012 they, along with hundreds of others, signed “A Call for Human Rights,” asking the National Assembly to abolish Article 88 of the Penal Code that punishes “crimes of propaganda against the State” and strike down a government decree invoked to prevent demonstrations. The two men have been prominent critics of China’s behavior toward Vietnam, particularly in the South China Sea.

In 2008, the foundation established annual prizes to honor academics who had made outstanding contributions to Vietnamese education. It is possible that the foundation’s choices of whom to honor contributed to its closure. Among them was one of the leading figures in Vietnamese studies in the United States, Cornell University’s Keith Taylor, whose 2013 book A History of the Vietnamese radically revised many of the more nationalist accounts of the country’s history.

Most critically, Taylor has also organized events examining the history of the Vietnam War from the perspective of South Vietnam. According to Hue-Tam Ho Tai, a professor emerita of Vietnamese studies at Harvard University, that “bothered a lot of leaders in Hanoi.” The foundation tried to give the award to Taylor in 2014 but was blocked from doing so by the party. They tried again in 2015 and overcame the objections. However, the Communist Party’s daily newspaper Nhan Dan (“The People”) carried denunciations of Taylor’s work for four straight days afterward.

There has been no comment from Vietnam’s government or the Communist Party about why the foundation has closed. Democracy campaigners will say that the party has deliberately silenced an influential advocate of political reform. Some will suspect that the closure was directly requested by Beijing in order to silence the domestic anti-China constituency.











Haiti - Politic : In Vietnam, the couple Martelly work for the future of Haiti

Wednesday in Hanoi (capital of Vietnam) former President Michel Joseph Martelly intervened at the Tourism Summit of the Vietnam Economic Forum (VIEF2018) in front of a very select audience of investors and tour operators where he promoted Haiti with passion, inviting Vietnamese investors to seize the opportunities in Haiti.

Excerpts from the intervention of former President Martelly :

"Between countries who believe in their beautiful culture, who believe in themselves and both of whom are destined to be gateways who in the Caribbean who in Southeast Asia, Gateway to a planned tourism because part of a strategic development policy.

when we have so many opportunities in common, visionaries, we can combine our assets for in this world become village, articulate a strategy to strengthen this industry for the benefit of our economies

It is to you that I propose, you the investors of the sector, you the tour operators, you of the banking sector... to go to plant your flag next to ours on the resorts and hotels, enclaves and infrastructure of dreams... to the doors of the Caribbean Sea

You will excuse my passion perhaps, but 'mwen gen nouvel pou nous ! Ayiti djamb', the Haiti of President Joseph Martelly, the Haiti of the late my friend René Préval, the Haiti of Jean-Bertrand Aristide can overcome his worries, which country does not have any ? Yes we can overcome our differences to welcome your investments

Together, I tell you, we make miracles, together I tell you, we can open new roads, the road of the sun. Because Haiti, my beloved Haiti has untapped opportunities [...]"

The day before, the Martelly couple's Rose et Blanc Foundation (FREB) officially became a member of the network of 100+ collaborators of the National University of Agriculture of Vietnam (VNUA), following the signature between Sophia Martelly, President FREB of a memorandum of understanding of cooperation with the VNUA and the professor Nguyen Thi Lan President of the University. As part of this cooperation, the two parties will set up a scholarship program and a short-term training program for students in the agricultural sector, with the support of the Haitian private sector and the private sector in Vietnam.











Vietnamese Authorities Break up Civil Society Conference in Hanoi

Vietnamese government authorities in Hanoi on Wednesday raided a gathering of registered NGOs and abruptly shut down their annual civil society workshop, drawing condemnation from an international rights group which called it “an alarming step-up of the authorities’ repression of civil society.”

Eight civil society groups from the health, public administration, and human rights sectors organized the two-day event which focused on the role of civil society groups in advising and engaging with the government on solutions to social issues.

After the meeting began, a blackout occurred in the auditorium while Gianh Hoang Dang, deputy director of Vietnam’s Center for Community Development Studies, was giving a presentation on the role of social organizations in ensuring access to public services, some attendees said.

Local police entered the hotel where the event was being held and ordered organizers to shut it down, accusing them of violating a wartime decree from 1957, which stipulates that those who arrange a gathering of more than five people in a public place must inform local authorities of their meeting 24 hours in advance.

Gianh, who researches civil society organizations, later said he did not want to comment on the event cancellation, but he pointed RFA’s Vietnamese Service to his comments on Facebook.

“State governance is a math problem that any country, even the U.S., China, Cuba, or Japan, has to solve,” he wrote.

“However, yesterday a workshop to discuss these topics held by eight nonprofit, nongovernmental organizations in various fields (health, governance and public administrative reform, human rights, gender, and community development) was cancelled by the local district People’s Committee,” Gianh wrote.

RFA could not reach another participant, Nguyen Duc Thanh, president of Vietnam’s Institute for Economic and Policy Research, for comment.

‘Absurd and shocking crackdown’

London-based Amnesty International took Hanoi authorities to task for their actions.

“This is an absurd and shocking crackdown on a well-established, peaceful event,” Minar Pimple, Amnesty’s senior director for global operations, said in a statement.

“To use an arcane wartime decree about holding events in public spaces to stop a private gathering at a hotel is clearly unjustified and cynical,” he said.

Pimple also noted that shutting down the event violated both international law and Vietnam’s constitution, which guarantees the rights to freedom of assembly and association.

“The authorities must allow this vital gathering of respected grassroots groups to go ahead and put an end to this worsening crackdown on civil society groups,” he said.

HRW criticizes cyber security law

On Thursday, meanwhile, New York-based Human Rights Watch (HRW) took aim at Vietnam’s new cybersecurity law,  which comes into force on Jan. 1, saying it will seriously undermine rights and called on the country to revise the legislation to bring it into line with international law.

Vietnam's National Assembly adopted the 43-article Law on Cybersecurity in June 2018, which tightens control of the internet and global tech companies operating in the communist country by requiring service providers to store data locally, verify user information, and disclose user data to authorities without a court order.

The law will also further restrict citizens’ use of the internet and require companies like Google and Facebook to delete posts considered “threatening” to national security.

In early November, the Ministry of Public Security, which will enforce the law along with the Ministry of Information and Communications, issued a draft decree with detailed instructions for carrying out the law with two months allotted for public feedback.

“This cybersecurity law is designed to further enable the Ministry of Public Security’s pervasive surveillance to spot critics, and to deepen the Communist Party’s monopoly on power,” Phil Robertson, HRW’s deputy Asia director, said in a statement.

“If this law is enacted, anyone who uses the internet in Vietnam will have zero privacy,” he said.

'Direct defiance'

Opponents both inside and outside the country have said that the law could cause economic harm and stifle online dissent.

Thousands of Vietnamese protesters took to the streets in rare demonstrations in several cities in June to protest the draft Law on Cybersecurity and government plans to grant long-term leases for foreign companies operating in special economic zones, prompting crackdowns by police who assaulted and arrested them.

Nearly 130 people were convicted for participating in protests as of November, receiving sentences of up to five years in prison, HRW said.

Within four months after the law was passed, almost 70,000 people had signed an online petition to urge the government to postpone the legislation and revise it, HRW said.

In a September letter to Federica Mogherini, European high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, and Cecilia Malmström, European Union commissioner for trade, some members of the European parliament said Vietnam should revise the law and bring it into compliance with international human rights standards, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which the country is a party.

“Vietnam’s Law on Cybersecurity and the accompanying decree trample on individual privacy in direct defiance of Hanoi’s promises to the European Union to respect rights,” Robertson said.

He called on EU member states to postpone any vote on a free trade agreement with Vietnam until the country revises the law and demonstrates improvements to its "abysmal" human rights record.

Reported by RFA’s Vietnam Service. Translated by Gia Minh. Written in English by Roseanne Gerin.















Politics
Vietnam Denies Having Political Prisoners, Blasts Amnesty International

Vietnam denied that it held any “prisoners of conscience,” calling an Amnesty International report that said the Communist government is jailing more of its critics “unfounded.”


“Amnesty International has deliberately made repeated nonobjective, unfounded judgments based on wrongful information and false prejudices on Vietnam,” Le Thi Thu Hang, spokeswoman for Vietnam’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said in an emailed statement late Tuesday. “This is an abusive, politically motivated practice, aimed to obstruct international cooperation and promotion of human rights in the world.”

VIETNAM-GERMANY-DIPLOMACY-KIDNAPPING-CORRUPTION
Le Thi Thu HangPhotographer: Hoang Ding Nam/AFP via Getty Images
Amnesty, in a report released Monday, said the number of “prisoners of conscience” jailed in Vietnam has increased to 128 from 97 last year as the government implements a controversial new cyber security law. The group pressed the U.S. to reiterate to Vietnam that closer relations between the two countries will depend on progress on human rights.

Vietnam doesn’t arrest citizens for expressing political views, Hang said.

“The State of Vietnam upholds its consistent policy of respecting and ensuring the residents’ fundamental rights, creating favorable conditions for residents to execute their legal rights,” she said. “Still, Vietnam has been firm on fighting against any intentional misuse of those rights to break the law, violate the state’s interests, legitimate rights and interests of organizations and residents.”

A new penal code took effect in Vietnam in 2018 that includes “vague and overly broad provisions that are often used to prosecute activists and other perceived critics,” Amnesty said in a statement. At least 34 people on the group’s list of prisoners of conscience were prosecuted under the new penal code, it said.










Here’s Why Vietnam Risks Being Labeled a Currency Manipulator

Vietnam may be the latest country to be targeted by the U.S. as a currency manipulator in a twice-yearly Treasury report on foreign currencies expected this month.

The Southeast Asian nation is coming under scrutiny for artificially holding down the value of the dong, people familiar with the matter said.

Read More: U.S. to Vet More Trading Partners for Currency Manipulation

The U.S. uses three criteria to determine if a country is a currency manipulator: a current-account surplus of more than 3% of gross domestic product; a bilateral goods trade surplus with the U.S. of at least $20 billion; and intervention in the foreign-exchange market that exceeds at least 2% of GDP.

The Treasury reduced the current-account surplus limit to 2% in its latest report, resulting in an expanded number of countries that will make its monitoring list, according to the people, who asked not to be identified because the report isn’t public yet.

In Crosshairs
Nine countries had goods trade surpluses with the U.S. for 2018

Vietnam and the U.S. have generally friendly relations and strong economic ties, with shared total trade of almost $62 billion last year. While China remains its top trading partner, Vietnam has become a strong political ally of the U.S. in recent years.

Here’s how Vietnam performs on the three criteria used by the U.S. Treasury in its currency manipulation report:

1. Current account surplus
Vietnam’s surplus on its current account -- broadly the difference between exports and imports of goods and services -- was 3% of GDP at the end of last year, the seventh surplus in eight years.

That’s largely owing to the nation’s success as an export engine over the past several years, which has cushioned the current account even as a rising middle class supports consumption and imports. Vietnam’s exports are equivalent to more than 100% of GDP, according to World Bank data, making it one of the most trade-dependent nations in the world.

Since a 10% plunge in exports at the start of 2014, Vietnam has had just three different months of year-on-year contraction in shipments. While regional peers continue to struggle amid a global trade slowdown, Vietnam was able to notch a 7.5% exports gain in April from the same time in 2018, the best in five months.

2. Trade surplus with the U.S.
Vietnam’s trade surplus with the U.S. has exceeded $20 billion since 2014, reaching $39.5 billion last year for the highest in records going back to 1990, according to U.S. Census Bureau data.

U.S. President Donald Trump has regularly used this gauge as a scorecard, previously ripping China, Russia and the European Union for wrongfully tinkering with their currencies that he views putting the U.S. exporters at a disadvantage.

3. Repeated interventions in currency markets
Vietnam’s central bank allows the dong to trade within a band of 3% on either side of a reference rate, which is based on eight currencies and is set every day. Authorities have in the past devalued the currency to support exports and the economy.

Foreign-currency reserves have doubled to $55 billion in the three years through the end of 2018, according to data from the International Monetary Fund. The State Bank of Vietnam, the nation’s central bank, purchased about $8.35 billion of foreign exchange since the beginning of the year to boost reserves to about $69 billion in May, Tin Tuc newspaper reported on Thursday, citing data from the central bank.


